CHAPTER  EIGHT MECHANICAL  PROPERTIES  OF SOLIDS 8.1 INTRODUCTION In Chapter 6, we studied the rotation of the bodies and then realised that the motion of a body depends on how mass is distributed within the body.  W e restricted ourselves to simpler situations of rigid bodies.  A rigid body generally means a hard solid object having a definite shape and size.  But in reality,  bodies can be stretched, compr essed and bent. Even the  appr eciably  rigid  steel bar can be defor med when a sufficiently lar ge exter nal for ce is applied on it.  This means that solid bodies ar e not per fectly rigid. A solid has  definite shape and size. In or der to change (or defor m) the shape or size of a body, a for ce  is r equir ed. If you str etch a helical spring by gently pulling its ends, the length of the spring incr eases slightly. When you leave the ends of the spring, it r egains its original size and shape

. If you str etch a helical spring by gently pulling its ends, the length of the spring incr eases slightly. When you leave the ends of the spring, it r egains its original size and shape.  The property of a body, by virtue of  which  it tends to r egain its original size and shape when the applied for ce is r emoved, is known as elasticity and the defor mation caused is known as elastic  defor mation. However , if you apply for ce to a lump of putty or mud, they have no gr oss tendency to r egain their previous shape, and they get per manently defor med. Such substances ar e called plastic  and this pr operty is called plasticity. Putty and mud ar e close to ideal plastics.  The elastic behaviour of materials plays an important r ole in engineering design.  For example, while designing a building, knowledge of elastic pr operties of materials like steel, concr ete etc. is essential.  The same is true in the design of bridges, automobiles, r opeways etc

. is essential.  The same is true in the design of bridges, automobiles, r opeways etc.  One could also ask  — Can we design an aer oplane which is very  light  but sufficiently  str ong?  Can we design an artificial limb which is lighter but str onger?  Why does a railway track have a particular shape  like  I?  Why  is glass brittle while brass is not?  Answers to such questions begin with the study of how relatively  simple kinds of loads or for ces act to defor m different solids bodies.  In this chapter , we  shall study the8.1 Introduction 8.2 Stress and strain 8.3 Hooke’s law 8.4 Stress-strain curve 8.5 Elastic moduli 8.6 Applications of elastic behaviour of materials Summary Points to ponder Exercises 2024-25  168 PHYSICS 8.2  STRESS AND STRAIN When  forces are applied on a body in such a manner that the body is still in static equilibrium, it is deformed to a small or large extent depending upon the nature of the material of the body and the magnitude of the deforming force

.  The deformation may not be noticeable visually in many materials but it is there.  When a body is subjected to a deforming force, a restoring force is developed in the body.  This restoring force is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the applied force. The restoring force per unit area is known as stress.  If F is the force applied normal to the cross–section and A  is the  area of cross section of  the body, Magnitude of the stress = F/A (8.1) The SI unit of stress is  N m–2 or pascal (Pa) and its dimensional for mula is [ ML–1T–2 ]. There are thr ee ways in which a solid may change its dimensions when an exter nal for ce acts on it. These are shown in Fig. 8.1. In Fig.8.1(a), a cylinder is stretched by two equal forces applied nor mal to its cr oss-sectional ar ea. The restoring force per unit area  in this case is called tensile stress . If the cylinder is compressed under the action of applied forces, the restoring force per unit area is known as compressive stress

. If the cylinder is compressed under the action of applied forces, the restoring force per unit area is known as compressive stress . Tensile or compressive stress can also be ter med as longitudinal str ess. In both the cases, ther e is a change in the length of the cylinder . The change in the length ∆L to the original length L of the body (cylinder in this case) is known as longitudinal strain .Longitudinal strain  Δ=L L(8.2) However , if two equal and opposite  defor ming forces ar e applied parallel to the cr oss-sectional area of the cylinder , as shown in Fig. 8.1(b), there is r elative displacement between the opposite faces of the cylinder .  The r estoring for ce per unit ar ea developed due to the applied tangential force is known as tangential or shearing stress. As a r esult of applied tangential for ce, ther e is a r elative displacement ∆x between opposite faces of the cylinder as shown in the Fig. 8.1(b)

. As a r esult of applied tangential for ce, ther e is a r elative displacement ∆x between opposite faces of the cylinder as shown in the Fig. 8.1(b). The strain so pr oduced is known as shearing strain  and it is defined as the ratio of relative displacement of the faces ∆x  to the length of the cylinder L . Shearing strain Δ=x L = tan θ (8.3) where θ is the angular displacement of the cylinder from the vertical (original position of the cylinder). Usually  θ is very small, tan θ is nearly equal to angle θ, (if θ = 10°, for example, ther e is only 1% dif ference between θ and tan θ). It can also be visualised, when a book is pressed with the hand and pushed horizontally, as shown in Fig. 8.2 (c). Thus, shearing strain  = tan θ ≈ θ (8.4) In Fig. 8.1 (d), a solid sphere placed in the fluid under high pressure is compressed uniformly on all sides. The force applied by the fluid acts in perpendicular direction at each point of the surface and the body is said to be under hydraulic compression

. The force applied by the fluid acts in perpendicular direction at each point of the surface and the body is said to be under hydraulic compression. This leads to decrease (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. 8.1 (a) A cylindrical body under tensile stress elongates by ∆L (b) She aring stress on a cylinder de forming it by an angle θ (c) A body subjected to shearing stress (d) A solid body under a stress normal to the surface at every point (hydraulic stress). The volumetric strain is ∆V/V, but ther e is no change in shape.elastic behaviour and mechanical properties of solids which would answer many such questions. 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF SOLIDS 169 in its volume without any change of its geometrical shape. The body develops internal restoring forces that are equal and opposite to the forces applied by the fluid (the body restores its original shape and size when taken out from the fluid)

. The body develops internal restoring forces that are equal and opposite to the forces applied by the fluid (the body restores its original shape and size when taken out from the fluid). The internal restoring force per unit area in this case is known as hydraulic stress  and in magnitude is equal to the hydraulic pressure (applied force per unit area). The strain produced by a hydraulic pressure is called volume strain and is defined as the ratio of change in volume ( ∆V) to the original volume ( V). Volume strain Δ=V V(8.5) Since the strain is a ratio of change in dimension to the original dimension, it has no units or dimensional formula. 8.3  HOOKE’S LAW Stress and strain take different forms in the situations depicted in the Fig. (8.1). For small deformations the stress and strain are proportional to each other . This is known as Hooke’s law. Thus, stress ∝ strain stress = k × strain (8.6) where k is the proportionality constant and is known as modulus of elasticity

. This is known as Hooke’s law. Thus, stress ∝ strain stress = k × strain (8.6) where k is the proportionality constant and is known as modulus of elasticity. Hooke’s law is an empirical law and is found to be valid for most materials. However , ther e are some materials which do not exhibit this linear relationship. 8.4  STRESS-STRAIN CURVE The relation between the stress and the strain for a given material under tensile str ess can be found experimentally. In a standard test of tensile pr operties, a test cylinder or a wir e is stretched by an applied for ce. The fractional change in length (the strain) and the applied force needed to cause the strain ar e recor ded. The applied force is gradually increased in steps and the change in length is noted. A graph is plotted between the str ess (which is equal in magnitude to the applied force per unit area) and the strain produced. A typical graph for a metal is shown in Fig. 8.2. Analogous graphs forcompression and shear stress may also be obtained

. A typical graph for a metal is shown in Fig. 8.2. Analogous graphs forcompression and shear stress may also be obtained. The stress-strain curves vary from material to material. These curves help us to understand how a given material defor ms with increasing loads. Fr om the graph, we can see that in the r egion between O to A, the curve is linear .  In this region, Hooke’s law is obeyed. The body r egains its original dimensions when the applied force is removed. In this region, the solid behaves as an elastic body. In the r egion from A to B, str ess and strain are not pr oportional. Nevertheless, the body still returns to its original dimension when the load is removed. The point B in the curve is known as yield point  (also known as elastic limit ) and the corr esponding str ess is known as yield strength ( σy) of the material. If the load is increased further , the str ess developed exceeds the yield str ength and strain increases rapidly even for a small change in the stress

. If the load is increased further , the str ess developed exceeds the yield str ength and strain increases rapidly even for a small change in the stress. The portion of the curve between B and D shows this. When the load is r emoved, say at some point C between B and D, the body does not regain its original dimension. In this case, even when the str ess is zer o, the strain is not zero. The material is said to have a permanent set. The defor mation is said to be plastic deformation . The point D on the graph is the ultimate tensile strength  (σu) of the material. Beyond this point, additional strain is pr oduced even by a r educed applied for ce and fractur e occurs at point E. If the ultimate strength and fracture points D and E are close, the material is said to be brittle . If they are far apart, the material is said to be ductile .Fig. 8.2 A typical stress-strain curve for a metal. 2024-25  170 PHYSICS As stated earlier , the str ess-strain behaviour varies from material to material

.Fig. 8.2 A typical stress-strain curve for a metal. 2024-25  170 PHYSICS As stated earlier , the str ess-strain behaviour varies from material to material. For example, rubber can be pulled to several times its original length and still returns to its original shape. Fig. 8.3 shows stress-strain curve for the elastic tissue of aorta, present in the heart. Note that although elastic region is very large, the material does not obey Hooke’s law over most of the region. Secondly, there is no well defined plastic region. Substances like tissue of aorta, rubber etc. which can be stretched to cause large strains are called elastomers .8.5  ELASTIC MODULI The proportional region within the elastic limit of the stress-strain curve (region OA in Fig. 8.2) is of great importance for structural and manufacturing engineering designs. The ratio of stress and strain, called modulus of elasticity , is found to be a characteristic of the material. 8.5

. 8.2) is of great importance for structural and manufacturing engineering designs. The ratio of stress and strain, called modulus of elasticity , is found to be a characteristic of the material. 8.5.1   Young’s Modulus Experimental observation show that for a given material, the magnitude of the strain pr oduced is same whether the str ess is tensile or compr essive. The ratio of tensile (or compr essive) stress ( σ) to the longitudinal strain ( ε) is defined as Young’s modulus  and is denoted by the symbol Y. Y =σ ε(8.7) From Eqs. (8.1) and (8.2), we have Y = (F/A)/(∆ L/L)    = (F × L ) /(A × ∆L) (8.8) Since strain is a dimensionless quantity, the unit of Y oung’s modulus is the same as that of stress i.e. , N m–2 or Pascal (Pa). Table 8.1 gives the values of Y oung’s moduli and yield str engths of some material. From the data given in Table 8.1, it is noticed that for metals Y oung’s moduli ar e lar ge.Fig. 8

. Table 8.1 gives the values of Y oung’s moduli and yield str engths of some material. From the data given in Table 8.1, it is noticed that for metals Y oung’s moduli ar e lar ge.Fig. 8.3 Stress-strain curve for the elastic tissue of Aorta, the lar ge tube (vessel) carrying blood from the heart. Table 8.1 Young’s moduli and yield strenghs of some material # Substance tested under compression 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF SOLIDS 171 uuTherefore, these materials require a large force to produce small change in length. To increase the length of a thin steel wire of 0.1 cm2 cross- sectional area by 0.1%, a force of 2000 N is required. The force required to produce the same strain in aluminium, brass and copper wir es having the same cr oss-sectional ar ea are 690 N, 900 N and 1100 N r espectively. It means that steel is mor e elastic than copper , brass and aluminium. It is for this reason that steel is preferred in heavy-duty machines and in structural designs

. It means that steel is mor e elastic than copper , brass and aluminium. It is for this reason that steel is preferred in heavy-duty machines and in structural designs. W ood, bone, concr ete and glass have rather small Y oung’s moduli. Example 8.1  A structural steel rod  has a radius of 10 mm and a length of 1.0 m. A 100 kN for ce str etches it along its length. Calculate (a) str ess, (b) elongation, and (c) strain on the r od. Y oung’s modulus, of structural steel is 2.0 × 1011 N m-2. Answer  We assume that the r od is held by a clamp at one end , and the force F is applied at the other end, parallel to the length of the rod. Then the stress on the rod is given by StressF A= =F rπ2         = ×( )× −100 10 N 3.14 1 0 m3 22          =  3.18 × 108 N m–2 The elongation, ( )F/A LLY∆ =     = ( )( ) × ×8 –2 11 –21m 3.18 10 N m 2 10 N m     = 1.59 × 10–3 m     = 1.59 mm The strain is given by Strain   = ∆L/L             = (1.59 × 10–3 m)/(1m)              = 1.59 × 10–3              = 0.16 % ⊳ Example 8

.18 10 N m 2 10 N m     = 1.59 × 10–3 m     = 1.59 mm The strain is given by Strain   = ∆L/L             = (1.59 × 10–3 m)/(1m)              = 1.59 × 10–3              = 0.16 % ⊳ Example 8.2  A copper wire of length 2.2 m and a steel wire of length 1.6 m, both of diameter 3.0 mm, are connected end to end. When stretched by a load, the net elongation is found to be 0.70 mm. Obtain the load applied.Answer The copper and steel wires are under a tensile stress because they have the same tension (equal to the load W) and the same area of cross-section A. From Eq. (8.7) we have stress = strain × Young’s modulus. Ther efore W/A = Yc × (∆Lc/Lc) = Ys × (∆Ls/Ls) where the subscripts c  and s refer to copper and stainless steel r espectively. Or , ∆Lc/∆Ls = (Ys/Yc) × (Lc/Ls) Given Lc = 2.2 m, Ls = 1.6 m, From T able 9.1 Yc = 1.1 × 1011 N.m–2, and    Ys = 2.0 ×  1011 N.m–2. ∆Lc/∆Ls = (2.0 × 1011/1.1 × 1011) × (2.2/1.6) = 2.5. The total elongation is given to be ∆Lc + ∆Ls =  7

.2 m, Ls = 1.6 m, From T able 9.1 Yc = 1.1 × 1011 N.m–2, and    Ys = 2.0 ×  1011 N.m–2. ∆Lc/∆Ls = (2.0 × 1011/1.1 × 1011) × (2.2/1.6) = 2.5. The total elongation is given to be ∆Lc + ∆Ls =  7.0  × 10-4 m Solving the above equations, ∆Lc = 5.0  × 10-4 m,   and   ∆ Ls = 2.0  × 10-4 m. Therefore W   = ( A × Yc × ∆Lc)/Lc = π (1.5 × 10-3)2 × [(5.0 × 10-4 × 1.1 × 1011)/2.2] = 1.8 × 102 N ⊳ uExample 8.3  In a human pyramid in a circus, the entire weight of the balanced group is supported by the legs of a performer who is lying on his back (as shown in Fig. 8.4). The combined mass of all the persons performing the act, and the tables, plaques etc. involved is 280 kg. The mass of the performer lying on his back at the bottom of the pyramid is 60 kg. Each thighbone (femur) of this performer has a length of 50 cm and an effective radius of 2.0 cm. Determine the amount by which each thighbone gets compressed under the extra load. Fig. 8.4  Human pyramid in a circus

.0 cm. Determine the amount by which each thighbone gets compressed under the extra load. Fig. 8.4  Human pyramid in a circus. 2024-25  172 PHYSICS Answer Total mass of all the performers, tables, plaques etc.     = 280 kg Mass of the performer  = 60 kg Mass supported by the legs of the performer at the bottom of the pyramid = 280 – 60 = 220 kg Weight of this supported mass  = 220 kg wt. = 220 × 9.8 N = 2156 N. Weight supported by each thighbone of the performer = ½ (2156) N = 1078 N. From Table 9.1, the Y oung’s modulus for bone is given by Y = 9.4 × 109 N m–2. Length of each thighbone L = 0.5 m the radius of thighbone = 2.0 cm Thus the cross-sectional area of the thighbone A  = π × (2 × 10-2)2 m2 = 1.26 × 10-3 m2. Using Eq. (9.8), the compression in each thighbone (∆ L) can be computed as ∆L=[(F × L)/(Y ×  A)] =[(1078 × 0.5)/(9.4 × 109 × 1.26 × 10-3)] =4.55 × 10-5 m or 4.55 × 10-3 cm. This is a very small change! The fractional decrease in the thighbone is ∆L/L = 0.000091 or 0.0091%. ⊳ 8.5

.5)/(9.4 × 109 × 1.26 × 10-3)] =4.55 × 10-5 m or 4.55 × 10-3 cm. This is a very small change! The fractional decrease in the thighbone is ∆L/L = 0.000091 or 0.0091%. ⊳ 8.5.2  Shear Modulus The ratio of shearing stress to the corresponding shearing strain is called the shear modulus  of the material and is represented by G. It is also called the modulus of rigidity . G  = shearing stress ( σs)/shearing strain G  = (F/A)/(∆x/L)     = (F × L)/(A × ∆x) (8.10) Similarly, from Eq. (9.4) G  = ( F/A)/θ      = F/(A × θ) (8.11) The shearing stress σs can also be expressed as σs  =  G  × θ (8.12) SI unit of shear modulus is N m–2 or Pa. The shear moduli of a few common materials are given in Table 9.2. It can be seen that shear modulus (or modulus of rigidity) is generally less than Y oung’s modulus (fr om Table 9.1). For most materials G ≈ Y/3.uTable 8.2 Shear moduli (G) of some common materials Material G (109 Nm–2 or GPa) Aluminium 25 Brass 36 Copper 42 Glass 23 Iron 70 Lead 5

.1). For most materials G ≈ Y/3.uTable 8.2 Shear moduli (G) of some common materials Material G (109 Nm–2 or GPa) Aluminium 25 Brass 36 Copper 42 Glass 23 Iron 70 Lead 5.6 Nickel 77 Steel 84 Tungsten 150 Wood 10  Example 8.4  A square lead slab of side 50 cm and thickness 10 cm is subject to a shearing for ce (on its narr ow face) of 9.0 × 104 N. The lower edge is riveted to the floor . How much will the upper edge be displaced? Answer  The lead slab is fixed and the force is applied parallel to the narrow face as shown in Fig. 8.6. The area of the face parallel to which this force is applied is  A  = 50 cm × 10 cm                 = 0.5 m × 0.1 m = 0.05 m2 Therefore, the stress applied is = (9.4  × 104 N/0.05 m2)                   = 1.80 × 106 N.m–2 aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa Fig. 8.5 We know that she aring strain = ( ∆x/L)= Stress /G. Therefore the displacement ∆x = (Stress × L)/G  = (1.8 × 106 N m–2 × 0.5m)/(5.6 × 109 N m–2)  = 1.6 ×  10–4 m = 0

. 8.5 We know that she aring strain = ( ∆x/L)= Stress /G. Therefore the displacement ∆x = (Stress × L)/G  = (1.8 × 106 N m–2 × 0.5m)/(5.6 × 109 N m–2)  = 1.6 ×  10–4 m = 0.16 mm ⊳ 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF SOLIDS 173 8.5.3  Bulk Modulus In Section (8.3), we have seen that when a body is submerged in a fluid, it undergoes a hydraulic stress (equal in magnitude to the hydraulic pressure). This leads to the decrease in the volume of the body thus producing a strain called volume strain [Eq. (8.5)]. The ratio of hydraulic stress to the corresponding hydraulic strain is called bulk modulus . It is denoted by symbol B. B = – p/(∆V/V) (8.12) The negative sign indicates the fact that with an increase in pressure, a decrease in volume occurs. That is, if p is positive, ∆ V is negative. Thus for a system in equilibrium, the value of bulk modulus B is always positive. SI unit of bulk modulus is the same as that of pr essur e i.e., N m–2 or Pa. The bulk moduli of a few common materials are given in Table 8.3

. SI unit of bulk modulus is the same as that of pr essur e i.e., N m–2 or Pa. The bulk moduli of a few common materials are given in Table 8.3. The reciprocal of the bulk modulus is called compressibility  and is denoted by k. It is defined as the fractional change in volume per unit increase in pressure. k = (1/ B) = – (1/ ∆p) × (∆V/V) (8.13) It can be seen from the data given in Table 8.3 that the bulk moduli for solids are much larger than for liquids, which are again much larger than the bulk modulus for gases (air). Table 8

.3 that the bulk moduli for solids are much larger than for liquids, which are again much larger than the bulk modulus for gases (air). Table 8.4 Stress, strain and various elastic moduli Type of Stress Strain     Change in Elastic  Name of State of stress  shape  volume Modulus  Modulus Matter  Tensile Two equal and Elongation or  Yes No           Y = (F×L)/  Young’s Solid   or opposite forces compression    (A×∆L) modulus  compressive perpendicular to parallel to force  (σ = F/A ) opposite faces direction ( ∆L/L ) (longitudinal strain)  Shearing Two equal and Pure shear , θ  Yes No        G = F/(A× θ) Shear Solid  (σs = F/A) opposite forces  modulus parallel to oppoiste  or modulus surfaces forces  of rigidity in each case such that total force and total torque on the body vanishes  Hydraulic Forces perpendicular Volume change   No Yes      B = –p/(∆V/V ) Bulk Solid, liquid everywhere to the (compression or  modulus and gas surface, force per elongation) unit area (pressure) (∆V/V) same everywhere.Table 8

.Table 8.3 Bulk moduli (B) of some common Materials Material B (109 N m–2 or GPa) Solids Aluminium 72 Brass 61 Copper 140 Glass 37 Iron 100 Nickel 260 Steel 160 Liquids Water 2.2 Ethanol 0.9 Carbon disulphide 1.56 Glycerine 4.76 Mercury 25 Gases Air (at STP) 1.0 × 10–4 2024-25  174 PHYSICS uThus, solids are the least compressible, whereas, gases are the most compressible. Gases are about a million times more compressible than solids! Gases have large compressibilities, which vary with pressure and temperature. The incompressibility of the solids is primarily due to the tight coupling between the neighbouring atoms. The molecules in liquids are also bound with their neighbours but not as strong as in solids. Molecules in gases are very poorly coupled to their neighbours. Table 8.4 shows the various types of stress, strain, elastic moduli, and the applicable state of matter at a glance. Example 8.5  The average depth of Indian Ocean is about 3000 m

. Table 8.4 shows the various types of stress, strain, elastic moduli, and the applicable state of matter at a glance. Example 8.5  The average depth of Indian Ocean is about 3000 m. Calculate the fractional compr ession, ∆V/V, of water at the bottom of the ocean, given that the bulk modulus of water is 2.2 × ×× ×× 109 N m–2. (Take g  = 10 m s–2) Answer    The press ure exerted by a  3000 m column of water on the bottom layer p = hρ g  = 3000 m  × 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 = 3  × 107 kg m–1 s-2 = 3  × 107 N m–2 Fractional compression ∆V/V, is ∆V/V  =  stress/ B  = (3 × 107 N m-2)/(2.2 × 109 N m–2) = 1.36 × 10-2 or  1.36 %     ⊳ 8.5.4 POISSON ’S RATIO The strain perpendicular to the applied force is called lateral strain . Simon Poisson pointed out that within the elastic limit, lateral strain is directly proportional to the longitudinal strain. The ratio of the lateral strain to the longitudinal strain in a stretched wire is called Poisson’s ratio

. The ratio of the lateral strain to the longitudinal strain in a stretched wire is called Poisson’s ratio. If the original diameter of the wire is d and the contraction of the diameter under stress is ∆d, the lateral strain is ∆d/d. If the original length of the wire is L and the elongation under stress is ∆L, the longitudinal strain is ∆L/L. Poisson’s ratio is then ( ∆d/d)/(∆L/L) or ( ∆d/∆L) × (L/d). Poisson’s ratio is a ratio of two strains; it is a pure number and has no dimensions or units. Its value depends only on the nature of material. For steels the value is between 0.28 and 0.30, and for aluminium alloys it is about 0.33.8.5.5 Elastic Potential Energy in a Stretched Wire When a wire is put under a tensile stress, work is done against the inter -atomic for ces. This work is stored in the wire in the form of elastic potential energy

. This work is stored in the wire in the form of elastic potential energy. When a wire of original length L and area of cross-section A is subjected to a deforming force F along the length of the wire, let the length of the wire be elongated by l. Then from Eq. (8.8), we have F = YA × (l/L). Her e Y is the Young’s modulus of the material of the wir e. Now for a further elongation of infinitesimal small length d l, work done d W is F × dl or YAldl/ L. Therefore, the amount of work done ( W) in increasing the length of the wire from L to L + l, that is from l = 0 to l = l is       W = = × ∫02 2lYAl YA ldlL L       W =  × × ×   21 2lY ALL = 1 2× Young’s modulus  × strain2 ×          volume of the wire = 1 2× stress  × strain  × volume of the           wire This work is stored in the wire in the form of elastic potential energy ( U). Therefore the elastic potential energy per unit volume of the wire ( u) is        u = 1 2×σ ε (8.14) 8

. Therefore the elastic potential energy per unit volume of the wire ( u) is        u = 1 2×σ ε (8.14) 8.6 APPLICATIONS OF ELASTIC BEHAVIOUR OF MATERIALS The elastic behaviour of materials plays an important role in everyday life. All engineering designs require precise knowledge of the elastic behaviour of materials. For example while designing a building, the structural design of the columns, beams and supports require knowledge of strength of materials used. Have you ever thought why the beams used in construction of bridges, as supp orts etc. have a cross-section of the type I? Why does a heap of sand or a hill have a pyramidal shape? Answers to these questions can be obtained from the study of structural engineering which is based on concepts developed here. 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF SOLIDS 175 Cranes used for lifting and moving heavy loads from one place to another have a thick metal rope to which the load is attached. The rope is pulled up using pulleys and motors

. The rope is pulled up using pulleys and motors. Suppose we want to make a crane, which has a lifting capacity of 10 tonnes or metric tons (1 metric ton = 100 0 kg). How thick should the steel rope be? W e obviously want that the load does not deform the rope permanently. Therefore, the extension should not exceed the elastic limit. From Table 8.1, we find that mild steel has a yield strength ( σy) of about 300 × 106 N m–2. Thus, the area of cross-section ( A) of the rope should at least be A ≥ W/σy  =  Mg/σy (8.15) =  (104 kg × 9.8 m s-2)/(300 × 106 N m-2) =  3.3 × 10-4 m2 corresponding to a radius of about 1 cm for a rope of circular cross-section. Generally a large margin of safety (of about a factor of ten in the load) is provided. Thus a thicker rope of radius about 3 cm is recommended. A single wire of this radius would practically be a rigid rod. So the ropes are always made of a number of thin wires braided together , like in pigtails, for ease in manufacture, flexibility and strength

. So the ropes are always made of a number of thin wires braided together , like in pigtails, for ease in manufacture, flexibility and strength. A bridge has to be designed such that it can withstand the load of the flowing traffic, the force of winds and its own weight. Similarly, in the design of buildings the use of beams and columns is very common. In both the cases, the overcoming of the problem of bending of beam under a load is of prime importance. The beam should not bend too much or break. Let us consider the case of a beam loaded at the centre and supported near its ends as shown in Fig. 8.6.  A bar of length l, breadth b, and depth d when loaded at the centre by a load W sags by an amount given by δ = W l3/(4bd3Y) (8.16)This relation can be derived using what you have already learnt and a little calculus. From Eq. (8.16), we see that to reduce the bending for a given load, one should use a material with a large Young’s modulus Y

. From Eq. (8.16), we see that to reduce the bending for a given load, one should use a material with a large Young’s modulus Y. For a given material, increasing the depth d rather than the breadth b is more effective in reducing the bending, since δ  is proportional to d -3 and only to b-1(of course the length l of the span should be as small as possible). But on increasing the depth, unless the load is exactly at the right place (difficult to arrange in a bridge with moving traffic), the deep bar  may bend as shown in Fig. 8.7(b). This is called buckling. To avoid this, a common compromise is the cross-sectional shape shown in Fig. 8.7(c). This section provides a large load- bearing surface and enough depth to prevent bending. This shape reduces the weight of the beam without sacrificing the strength and hence reduces the cost. Fig. 8.6 A beam supported at the ends and loaded at the centre.(a) (b) (c) Fig. 8.7 Different cross-sectional shapes of a beam

. Fig. 8.6 A beam supported at the ends and loaded at the centre.(a) (b) (c) Fig. 8.7 Different cross-sectional shapes of a beam. (a) Rectangular section of a bar; (b) A thin bar and how it can buckle; (c) Commonly used section for a load bearing bar . The use of pillars or columns is also very common in buildings and bridges. A pillar with rounded ends as shown in Fig. 8.9(a) supports less load than that with a distributed shape at the ends [Fig. 8.9(b)]. The precise design of a bridge or a building has to take into account the conditions under which it will function, the cost and long period, reliability of usable material, etc. 2024-25  176 PHYSICS SUMMARY 1. Stress is the restoring force per unit area and strain is the fractional change in dimension. In general there are three types of stresses (a) tensile stress — longitudinal stress (associated with stretching) or compressive stress (associated with compression), (b) shearing stress, and (c) hydraulic stress. 2

. 2. For small deformations,  stress is directly proportional to the strain for many materials. This is known as Hooke’s law. The constant of proportionality is called modulus of elasticity. Thr ee elastic moduli viz., Young’s modulus, shear modulus and bulk modulus are used to describe the elastic behaviour of objects as they respond to deforming forces that act on them. A class of solids called elastomers does not obey Hooke’s law. 3. When an object is under tension or compression, the Hooke’s law takes the form  F/A  = Y∆L/L where  ∆L/L is the tensile or compressive strain of the object, F is the magnitude of the applied force causing the strain, A is the cross-sectional area over which F is applied (perpendicular to A) and Y is the Y oung’s modulus for the object. The str ess is F/A. 4. A pair of forces when applied parallel to the upper and lower faces, the solid deforms so that the upper face moves sideways with r espect to the lower

. The str ess is F/A. 4. A pair of forces when applied parallel to the upper and lower faces, the solid deforms so that the upper face moves sideways with r espect to the lower . The horizontal displacement ∆L of the upper face is perpendicular to the vertical height L. This type of deformation is called shear  and the corresponding stress is the shearing stress. This type of stress is possible only in solids. In this kind of deformation the Hooke’s law takes the form F/A = G  × ∆L/L where ∆L is the displacement of one end of object in the direction of the applied force F, and G is the shear modulus. 5. When an object undergoes hydraulic compression due to a stress exerted by a surrounding fluid, the Hooke’s law takes the form p = B (∆V/V), where p is the pressure (hydraulic stress) on the object due to the fluid, ∆V/V  (the volume strain) is the absolute fractional change in the object’s volume due to that pressure and B is the bulk modulus  of the object

.                    (a)                         (b) Fig. 8.8 Pillars or columns: (a) a pillar with rounded ends, (b) Pillar with distributed ends. The answer to the question why the maximum height of a mountain on earth is ~10 km can also be provided by considering the elastic properties of rocks. A mountain base is not under uniform compression and this provides someshearing stress to the rocks under which they can flow. The stress due to all the material on the top should be less than the critical shearing stress at which the rocks flow. At the bottom of a mountain of height h, the force per unit area due to the weight of the mountain is hρg where ρ is the density of the material of the mountain and g is the acceleration due to gravity. The material at the bottom experiences this force in the vertical direction, and the sides of the mountain are free. Therefore, this is not a case of pressure or bulk compression. There is a shear component, approximately hρg itself

. Therefore, this is not a case of pressure or bulk compression. There is a shear component, approximately hρg itself. Now the elastic limit for a typical rock is 30 × 107 N m-2. Equating this to hρg, with ρ  = 3 × 103 kg m-3 gives hρg  = 30 × 107 N m-2 . h      =  30 × 107 N m-2/(3 × 103 kg m-3 × 10 m s-2)       = 10 km which is more than the height of Mt. Everest! 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF SOLIDS 177 POINTS TO PONDER 1.In the case of a wire, suspended from celing and stretched under the action of a weight ( F) suspended from its other end, the force exerted by the ceiling on it is  equal and opposite to the weight. However , the tension at any cr oss-section A of the wir e is just F and not 2 F. Hence, tensile stress which is equal to the tension per unit area is equal to F/A. 2.Hooke’s law is valid only in the linear part of stress-strain curve. 3.The Y oung’s modulus and shear modulus ar e relevant only for solids since only solids have lengths and shapes. 4

. 2.Hooke’s law is valid only in the linear part of stress-strain curve. 3.The Y oung’s modulus and shear modulus ar e relevant only for solids since only solids have lengths and shapes. 4.Bulk modulus is relevant for solids, liquid and gases.  It refers to the change in volume when every part of the body is under the uniform stress so that the shape of the body remains unchanged. 5.Metals have lar ger values of Y oung’s modulus than alloys and elastomers. A material with lar ge value of Y oung’s modulus r equir es a large for ce to pr oduce small changes in its length. 6.In daily life, we feel that a material which stretches more is more elastic, but it a is misnomer . In fact material which str etches to a lesser extent for a given load is consider ed to be more elastic. 7.In general, a deforming force in one direction can produce strains in other directions also. The proportionality between stress and strain in such situations cannot be described by just one elastic constant

. The proportionality between stress and strain in such situations cannot be described by just one elastic constant.  For example, for a wire under longitudinal strain, the lateral dimensions (radius of cross section) will undergo a small change, which is described by another elastic constant of the material (called Poisson ratio ). 8.Stress is not a vector quantity since, unlike a force, the stress cannot be assigned a specific dir ection. For ce acting on the portion of a body on a specified side of a section has a definite dir ection. EXERCISES 8.1 A steel wire of length 4.7 m and cross-sectional area 3.0 × 10-5 m2 stretches by the same amount as a copper wire of length 3.5 m and cross-sectional area of 4.0 × 10–5 m2 under a given load. What is the ratio of the Y oung’s modulus of steel to that of copper? 8.2 Figur e 8.9 shows the strain-str ess curve for a given material. What ar e (a) Y oung’s modulus and (b) approximate yield strength for this material? Fig. 8.9 2024-25  178 PHYSICS 8

.2 Figur e 8.9 shows the strain-str ess curve for a given material. What ar e (a) Y oung’s modulus and (b) approximate yield strength for this material? Fig. 8.9 2024-25  178 PHYSICS 8.3 The stress-strain graphs for materials A and B are shown in Fig. 8.10. Fig. 8.10 The graphs are drawn to the same scale. (a) Which of the materials has the gr eater Y oung’s modulus? (b) Which of the two is the stronger material? 8.4 Read the following two statements below carefully and state, with reasons, if it is true or false. (a) The Y oung’s modulus of rubber is gr eater than that of steel; (b) The str etching of a coil is deter mined by its shear modulus. 8.5 Two wires of diameter 0.25 cm, one made of steel and the other made of brass are loaded as shown in Fig. 8.11. The unloaded length of steel wire is 1.5 m and that of brass wire is 1.0 m. Compute the elongations of the steel and the brass wires. Fig. 8.11 8.6 The edge of an aluminium cube is 10 cm long. One face of the cube is firmly fixed to a vertical wall

.0 m. Compute the elongations of the steel and the brass wires. Fig. 8.11 8.6 The edge of an aluminium cube is 10 cm long. One face of the cube is firmly fixed to a vertical wall. A mass of 100 kg is then attached to the opposite face of the cube. The shear modulus of aluminium is 25 GPa. What is the vertical deflection of this face? 8.7 Four identical hollow cylindrical columns of mild steel support a big structure of mass 50,000 kg. The inner and outer radii of each column are 30 and 60 cm respectively. Assuming the load distribution to be uniform, calculate the compressional strain of each column. 8.8 A piece of copper having a rectangular cross-section of 15.2 mm × 19.1 mm is pulled in tension with 44,500 N force, producing only elastic deformation. Calculate the resulting strain? 8.9 A steel cable with a radius of 1.5 cm supports a chairlift at a ski area. If the maximum stress is not to exceed 108 N m–2, what is the maximum load the cable can support ? 8

.9 A steel cable with a radius of 1.5 cm supports a chairlift at a ski area. If the maximum stress is not to exceed 108 N m–2, what is the maximum load the cable can support ? 8.10 A rigid bar of mass 15 kg is supported symmetrically by three wires each 2.0 m long. Those at each end are of copper and the middle one is of iron. Determine the ratios of their diameters if each is to have the same tension. 8.11 A 14.5 kg mass, fastened to the end of a steel wire of unstretched length 1.0 m, is whirled in a vertical circle with an angular velocity of 2 rev/s at the bottom of the circle. The cross-sectional area of the wire is 0.065 cm2. Calculate the elongation of the wire when the mass is at the lowest point of its path. 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF SOLIDS 179 8.12 Compute the bulk modulus of water from the following data: Initial volume = 100.0 litre, Pressure increase = 100.0 atm (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa), Final volume = 100.5 litre

.12 Compute the bulk modulus of water from the following data: Initial volume = 100.0 litre, Pressure increase = 100.0 atm (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa), Final volume = 100.5 litre. Compare the bulk modulus of water with that of air (at constant temperature). Explain in simple terms why the ratio is so large. 8.13 What is the density of water at a depth where pressure is 80.0 atm, given that its density at the surface is 1.03 × 103 kg m–3? 8.14 Compute the fractional change in volume of a  glass slab, when subjected to a hydraulic pressure of 10 atm. 8.15 Determine the volume contraction of a solid copper cube, 10 cm on an edge, when subjected to a hydraulic pressure of 7.0 × 106 Pa. 8.16 How much should the pressure on a litre of water be changed to compress it by 0.10%? carry one quarter of the load. 2024-25  CHAPTER  NINE MECHANICAL  PROPERTIES  OF FLUIDS 9.1 INTRODUCTION In this chapter , we shall study  some common physical properties of liquids and gases

.10%? carry one quarter of the load. 2024-25  CHAPTER  NINE MECHANICAL  PROPERTIES  OF FLUIDS 9.1 INTRODUCTION In this chapter , we shall study  some common physical properties of liquids and gases. Liquids and gases can  flow and are ther efore, called  fluids.  It is this pr operty that distinguishes liquids and gases fr om solids in a basic way. Fluids ar e everywher e around us. Earth has an envelop of air and two-thir ds of its sur face is cover ed with water .  Water is not only necessary for our existence; every mammalian body constitute mostly of water . All the  pr ocesses occurring in living beings including plants ar e mediated by fluids. Thus understanding the behaviour and pr operties of fluids is important. How ar e fluids dif ferent fr om solids? What is common in liquids and gases? Unlike  a solid, a fluid has no definite shape of its own. Solids and liquids have a fixed volume, wher eas a gas fills the entir e volume of its container

. Solids and liquids have a fixed volume, wher eas a gas fills the entir e volume of its container . We have lear nt in the pr evious chapter that the volume of solids can be changed by str ess. The volume of solid, liquid or gas depends on the str ess or pr essur e acting on it. When we talk about fixed volume of solid or liquid, we mean its volume under atmospheric pr essur e. The dif ference between gases and solids or liquids is that for solids or liquids the change in volume due to  change of exter nal pr essur e is rather small. In other wor ds solids and liquids have much lower compr essibility as compar ed to gases. Shear str ess can change the shape of a solid keeping its volume fixed. The key pr operty of fluids is that they of fer very little r esistance to shear str ess; their shape changes by application of very small shear str ess. The shearing str ess of fluids is about million times smaller than that of solids. 9.2  PRESSURE A sharp needle when pressed against our skin pierces it

. The shearing str ess of fluids is about million times smaller than that of solids. 9.2  PRESSURE A sharp needle when pressed against our skin pierces it. Our skin, however , remains intact when a blunt object with a wider contact ar ea (say the back of a spoon) is pr essed against it with the same for ce. If an elephant wer e to step on a man’s chest, his ribs would crack. A cir cus per former acr oss whose9.1 Introduction 9.2 Pressure 9.3 Streamline flow 9.4 Bernoulli’s principle 9.5 Viscosity 9.6 Surface tension Summary Points to ponder Exercises Additional exercises Appendix 2024-25  chest a large, light but strong wooden plank is placed first, is saved fr om this accident. Such everyday experiences convince us that both the force and its coverage ar ea are important. Smaller the ar ea on which the for ce acts, gr eater is the impact. This impact is known  as pressure. When an object is submer ged in a fluid at rest, the fluid exerts a for ce on its sur face

. Smaller the ar ea on which the for ce acts, gr eater is the impact. This impact is known  as pressure. When an object is submer ged in a fluid at rest, the fluid exerts a for ce on its sur face. This force is always nor mal to the object’s sur face. This is so because if ther e wer e a component of for ce parallel to the sur face, the object will also exert a for ce on the fluid parallel to it; as a consequence of Newton’s thir d law. This for ce will cause the fluid to flow parallel to the sur face. Since the fluid is at r est, this cannot happen. Hence, the for ce exerted by the fluid at r est has to be perpendicular to the sur face in contact with it. This is shown in Fig.9.1(a). The nor mal for ce exerted by the fluid at a point may be measur ed. An idealised for m of one such pressure-measuring device is shown in Fig. 9.1(b). It consists of an evacuated chamber with a spring that is calibrated to measur e the for ce acting on the piston. This device is placed at a point inside the fluid

. 9.1(b). It consists of an evacuated chamber with a spring that is calibrated to measur e the for ce acting on the piston. This device is placed at a point inside the fluid. The inwar d force exerted by the fluid on the piston is balanced by the outwar d spring for ce and is ther eby measur ed. If F is the magnitude of this nor mal for ce on the piston of area A then the average pressure  Pav is defined as the nor mal for ce acting per unit area. PF Aav=              (9.1)In principle, the piston area can be made arbitrarily small. The pr essur e is then defined in a limiting sense as P = lim ∆A 0→Δ ΔF A(9.2) Pressur e is a scalar quantity. W e remind the reader that it is the component of the for ce normal to the ar ea under consideration and not the (vector) for ce that appears in the numerator in Eqs. (9.1) and (9.2). Its dimensions are [ML–1T–2]. The SI unit of pr essur e is N m–2

. (9.1) and (9.2). Its dimensions are [ML–1T–2]. The SI unit of pr essur e is N m–2. It has been named as pascal (Pa) in honour of the French scientist Blaise Pascal (1623-1662) who carried out pioneering studies on fluid pr essur e. A common unit of pr essur e is the atmospher e (atm), i.e. the pr essur e exerted by the atmospher e at sea level (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa). Another quantity, that is indispensable in describing fluids, is the density ρ. For a fluid of mass m occupying volume V, ρ=m V(9.3) The dimensions of density are [ML–3]. Its SI unit is kg m–3. It is a positive scalar quantity. A liquid is lar gely incompr essible and its density is ther efore, nearly constant at all pr essur es. Gases, on the other hand exhibit a lar ge variation in densities with pr essur e. The density of water at 4oC (277 K) is 1.0 × 103 kg m–3. The r elative density of a substance is the ratio of its density to the density of water at 4oC. It is a dimensionless positive scalar quantity

.0 × 103 kg m–3. The r elative density of a substance is the ratio of its density to the density of water at 4oC. It is a dimensionless positive scalar quantity. For example the r elative density of aluminium is 2.7. Its density is 2.7 × 103 kg m–3 .  The densities of some common fluids are displayed in Table 9.1. Table 9.1 Densities of some common fluids at STP*  (a) (b) Fig. 9.1 (a) The force exerted by the liquid in the beaker on the submerged object or on the walls is nor mal (perpendicular) to the surface at all points. (b) An idealised device for measuring pressur e. *STP means standar d temperatur e (00C) and 1 atm pr essur e.MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 181 2024-25  182 PHYSICS⊳Example 9.1   The two thigh bones (femurs), each of cross-sectional area10 cm2 support the upper part of a human body of mass 40 kg. Estimate the average pressure sustained by the femurs. Answer   Total cr oss-sectional ar ea of the femurs is A = 2 × 10 cm2 = 20 × 10–4 m2

. Estimate the average pressure sustained by the femurs. Answer   Total cr oss-sectional ar ea of the femurs is A = 2 × 10 cm2 = 20 × 10–4 m2. The force acting on them is F = 40kg wt = 400 N (taking g = 10 m s–2). This for ce is acting vertically down and hence, nor mally on the femurs. Thus, the average pr essur e is 2 5m  N  10   2     −× = =AFPav                             ⊳ 9.2.1 Pascal’s Law The French scientist Blaise Pascal observed that the pr essur e in a fluid at r est is the same at all points if they ar e at the same height. This fact may be demonstrated in a simple way. Fig. 9.2 shows an element in the interior of a fluid at rest. This element ABC-DEF is in the form of a right-angled prism. In principle, this prismatic element is very small so that every part of it can be consider ed at the same depth from the liquid sur face and ther efore, the ef fect of the gravity is the same at all these points. But for clarity we have enlar ged this element

. But for clarity we have enlar ged this element. The for ces on this element ar e those exerted by the rest of the fluid and they must be nor mal to the sur faces of the element as discussed above. Thus, the fluid exerts pr essur es Pa, Pb and Pc onthis element of area corresponding to the normal forces Fa, Fb and Fc as shown in Fig. 9.2 on the faces BEFC, ADFC and ADEB denoted by Aa, Ab and Ac respectively. Then Fb sinθ = Fc,Fb cosθ = Fa(by equilibrium) Ab sinθ = Ac,Ab cosθ = Aa(by geometry) Thus, ;b c a b c a b c aF F FP P PA A A= = = =(9.4) Hence, pressure exerted is same in all directions in a fluid at r est. It again r eminds us that like other types of str ess, pr essur e is not a vector quantity. No dir ection can be assigned to it.  The for ce against any ar ea within (or bounding) a fluid at r est and under pr essur e is normal to the ar ea, regardless of the orientation of the ar ea. Now consider a fluid element in the for m of a horizontal bar of unifor m cross-section. The bar is in equilibrium

. Now consider a fluid element in the for m of a horizontal bar of unifor m cross-section. The bar is in equilibrium. The horizontal for ces exerted at its two ends  must be balanced or the pressur e at the two ends should be equal. This proves that for a liquid in equilibrium the pressur e is same at all points in a horizontal plane. Suppose the pr essur e wer e not equal in different parts of the fluid, then ther e would be a flow as the  fluid will have some net for ce acting on it. Hence in the absence of flow the pressure in the fluid must be same everywhere in a horizontal plane. 9.2.2 Variation of Pressure with Depth Consider a fluid at r est in a container . In Fig. 9.3 point 1 is at height h above a point 2. The pr essur es at points 1 and 2 ar e P1 and P2 respectively. Consider a cylindrical element of fluid having ar ea of base A and height h. As the fluid is at r est the r esultant horizontal for ces should be zer o and the r esultant vertical for ces should balance the weight of the element

. As the fluid is at r est the r esultant horizontal for ces should be zer o and the r esultant vertical for ces should balance the weight of the element. The forces acting in the vertical dir ection ar e due to the fluid pr essur e at the top ( P1A) acting downwar d, at the bottom ( P2A) acting upwar d. If mg is weight of the fluid in the cylinder we have (P2 − P1) A = mg (9.5) Now, if ρ is the mass density of the fluid, we have the mass of fluid to be m = ρV= ρhA so that P2 − P1=  ρgh (9.6)Fig. 9.2 Proof of Pascal’s law. ABC-DEF is an element of the interior of a fluid at r est. This element is in the for m of a right- angled prism. The element is small so that the ef fect of gravity can be ignor ed, but it has been enlar ged for the sake of clarity. 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 183⊳ Fig.9.3 Fluid under gravity. The effect of gravity is illustrated through pressure on a vertical cylindrical column

. 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 183⊳ Fig.9.3 Fluid under gravity. The effect of gravity is illustrated through pressure on a vertical cylindrical column. Pressur e difference depends on the vertical distance h between the points (1 and 2), mass density of the fluid ρ and acceleration due to gravity g. If the point 1 under discussion is shifted to the top of the  fluid (say, water), which is open to the atmospher e, P1 may be r eplaced by atmospheric pr essur e (Pa) and we r eplace P2 by P. Then Eq. (9.6) gives P = Pa + ρgh (9.7) Thus, the pr essur e P, at depth below the surface of a liquid open to the atmospher e is greater than atmospheric pr essur e by an amount ρgh. The excess of pr essur e, P − Pa, at depth h is called a gauge pressure  at that point. The ar ea of the cylinder is not appearing in the expression of absolute pressure in Eq. (9.7). Thus, the height of the fluid column is important and not cros s-sectional or base area or the shape of the container

. (9.7). Thus, the height of the fluid column is important and not cros s-sectional or base area or the shape of the container . The liquid pressur e is the same at all points at the same horizontal level (same depth).  The result is appreciated through the example of hydrostatic paradox . Consider three vessels A, B and C  [Fig.9.4] of different shapes. They are connected at the bottom by a horizontal pipe. On filling with water , the level in the thr ee vessels is the same, though they hold different amounts of water . This is so because water at the bottom has the same pressure below each section of the vessel.Fig 9.4 Illustration of hydrostatic paradox. The three vessels A, B and C contain dif ferent amounts of liquids, all upto the same height. Example 9.2 What is the pressure on a swimmer 10 m below the sur face of a lake? Answer  Here h = 10 m  and ρ = 1000 kg m-3. Take g = 10 m s–2 From Eq. ( 9.7) P = Pa + ρgh    = 1.01 × 105 Pa + 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 × 10 m    = 2

. Take g = 10 m s–2 From Eq. ( 9.7) P = Pa + ρgh    = 1.01 × 105 Pa + 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 × 10 m    = 2.01 × 105 Pa     ≈ 2 atm This is a 100% incr ease in pr essur e from surface level. At a depth of 1 km, the increase in pressure is 100 atm! Submarines are designed to withstand such enormous pressures.   ⊳ 9.2.3 Atmospheric Pressure and Gauge Pressure The pressure of the atmosphere at any point is equal to the weight of a column of air of unit cross-sectional area extending from that point to the top of the atmosphere. At sea level, it is 1.013 × 105 Pa (1 atm). Italian scientist Evangelista Torricelli (160 8–1647) devised for the first time a method for measuring atmospheric pr essur e. A long glass tube closed at one end and filled with mer cury is inverted into a trough of mercury as shown in Fig. 9.5 (a). This device is known as ‘mercury barometer’. The space above the mercury column in the tube contains only mercury vapour whose pressure P is so small  that it may be neglected

. 9.5 (a). This device is known as ‘mercury barometer’. The space above the mercury column in the tube contains only mercury vapour whose pressure P is so small  that it may be neglected. Thus, the pressure at Point A=0. The pressure inside the coloumn at Point B must be the same as the pressure at Point C, which is atmospheric pressure, P a. Pa = ρgh (9.8) where ρ is the density of mercury and h is the height of the mercury column in the tube. 2024-25  184 PHYSICS ⊳⊳In the experiment it is found that the mercury column in the barometer has a height of about 76 cm at sea level equivalent to one atmosphere (1 atm). This can also be obtained using the value of ρ in Eq. (9.8). A common way of stating pressur e is in ter ms of cm or mm of mer cury (Hg). A pr essur e equivalent of 1 mm is called a torr (after T orricelli). 1 torr = 133 Pa. The mm of Hg and torr ar e used in medicine and physiology. In meteor ology, a common unit is the bar and millibar

. 1 torr = 133 Pa. The mm of Hg and torr ar e used in medicine and physiology. In meteor ology, a common unit is the bar and millibar . 1 bar = 105 Pa An open tube manometer is a useful instrument for measuring pressure differences. It consists of a U-tube containing a suitable liquid i.e., a low density liquid (such as oil) for measuring small pressure differences and a high density liquid (such as mercury) for large pressure differences. One end of the tube is open to the atmosphere and the other end is connected to the system whose pressure we want to measure [see Fig. 9.5 (b)]. The pressure P at A is equal to pressure at point B. What we normally measure is the gauge pressure, which is P − Pa, given by Eq. (9.8) and is proportional to manometer height h.Pressure is same at the same level on both sides of the U-tube containing a fluid. For liquids, the density varies very little over wide ranges in pressure and temperature and we can treat it safely as a constant for our present purposes

. For liquids, the density varies very little over wide ranges in pressure and temperature and we can treat it safely as a constant for our present purposes. Gases on the other hand, exhibits large variations of densities with changes in pressure and temperature. Unlike gases, liquids are, therefore, largely treated as incompressible. Example 9.3  The density of the atmosphere at sea level is 1.29 kg/m3. Assume that it does not change with altitude. Then how high would the atmosphere extend? Answer  We use Eq. (9.7) ρgh  =  1.29 kg m–3 × 9.8 m s2 × h  m = 1.01 ×  105 Pa ∴ h = 7989 m ≈ 8 km In reality the density of air decreases with height. So does the value of g. The atmospheric cover extends with decreasing pressure over 100 km. W e should also note that the sea level atmospheric pressure is not always 760 mm of Hg. A drop in the Hg level by 10 mm or more is a sign of an approaching storm. ⊳ Example 9

. W e should also note that the sea level atmospheric pressure is not always 760 mm of Hg. A drop in the Hg level by 10 mm or more is a sign of an approaching storm. ⊳ Example 9.4  At a depth of 1000 m in an ocean (a) what is the absolute pressure? (b) What is the gauge pressure? (c) Find the force acting on the window of area 20 cm × 20 cm of a submarine at this depth, the interior of which is maintained at sea- level atmospheric pressure. (The density of sea water is 1.03 × 103 kg m-3, g = 10 m s–2.) (b) The open tube manometer Fig 9.5   Two pressure measuring devices. Fig 9.5 (a) The mer cury barometer . 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 185⊳Answer  Here h = 1000 m and ρ = 1.03 × 103 kg m-3. (a)From Eq. (9.6), absolute pressure P = Pa + ρgh = 1.01 × 105 Pa    + 1.03 × 103 kg m–3  × 10 m s–2 × 1000 m =  104.01 × 105 Pa ≈ 104 atm (b)Gauge pressure is P − Pa = ρgh = Pg Pg = 1

. (a)From Eq. (9.6), absolute pressure P = Pa + ρgh = 1.01 × 105 Pa    + 1.03 × 103 kg m–3  × 10 m s–2 × 1000 m =  104.01 × 105 Pa ≈ 104 atm (b)Gauge pressure is P − Pa = ρgh = Pg Pg = 1.03 × 103 kg m–3 × 10 ms2 × 1000 m     = 103 × 105 Pa      ≈ 103 atm (c)The pressure outside the submarine is P = Pa + ρgh and the pressure inside it is Pa. Hence, the net pressure acting on the window is gauge pressure, Pg = ρgh. Since the area of the window is A = 0.04 m2, the force acting on it is F = Pg A = 103 × 105 Pa × 0.04 m2 = 4.12 × 105 N   ⊳ 9.2.4  Hydraulic Machines Let us now consider what happens when we change the pressure on a fluid contained in a vessel. Consider a horizontal cylinder with a piston and three vertical tubes at different points [Fig. 9.6 (a)]. The pressure in the horizontal cylinder is indicated by the height of liquid column in the vertical tubes. It is necessarily the same in all. If we push the piston, the fluid level rises in all the tubes, again reaching the same level in each one of them

. It is necessarily the same in all. If we push the piston, the fluid level rises in all the tubes, again reaching the same level in each one of them.law. In these devices, fluids are used for transmitting pressure. In a hydraulic lift, as shown in Fig. 9.6 (b), two pistons are separated by the space filled with a liquid. A piston of small cross-section  A1 is used to exert a force F1 directly on the liquid. The pressure P = 1 1F A is transmitted throughout the liquid to the larger cylinder attached with a larger piston of area A2, which results in an upward force of P × A2. Therefore, the piston is capable of supporting a large for ce (lar ge weight of, say a car , or a truck, placed  on the platform ) F2 = PA2 = 1 2 1F A A. By changing the force at A1, the platform can be moved up or down. Thus, the applied force has been increased by a factor of 2 1A A and this factor is the mechanical advantage of the device. The example below clarifies it. Fig 9

. Thus, the applied force has been increased by a factor of 2 1A A and this factor is the mechanical advantage of the device. The example below clarifies it. Fig 9.6   (a) Whenever external pressure is applied    on any part of a fluid in a vessel, it is equally transmitted in all directions.      This indicates that when the pressure  on the cylinder was increased, it was distributed unifor mly thr oughout. W e can say  whenever external pressure is applied on any part of a fluid contained in a vessel, it is transmitted undiminished and equally in all directions. This is another form of the Pascal’s law and it has many applications in daily life . A number of devices, such as hydraulic lift and hydraulic brakes,  are based on the Pascal’s Fig 9.6 (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the principle   behind the hydraulic lift, a device used   to lift heavy loads. Example 9

.6 (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the principle   behind the hydraulic lift, a device used   to lift heavy loads. Example 9.5  Two syringes of different cross-sections (without needles) filled with water are connected with a tightly fitted rubber tube filled with water . Diameters of the smaller piston and larger piston are 1.0 cm and 3.0 cm respectively. (a)  Find the force exerted on  the larger piston when a force of 10 N is applied to the smaller piston. (b) If the smaller piston is pushed in through 6.0 cm, how much does the larger piston move out? Answer  (a) Since pressure is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid, 2024-25  186 PHYSICS⊳( ) ( )2–2 2 2 1 2–213/2 10 m 10 N 1/2 10 mAF FAπ π× = = × ×              = 90 N (b) W ater is consider ed to be per fectly incompr essible. V olume cover ed by the movement of smaller piston inwards is equal to volume moved outwards due to the larger piston. 2 2 1 1A L A L =        j 0.67 × 10-2 m = 0

. V olume cover ed by the movement of smaller piston inwards is equal to volume moved outwards due to the larger piston. 2 2 1 1A L A L =        j 0.67 × 10-2 m = 0.67 cm Note, atmospheric pressure is common to both pistons and has been ignored. ⊳ Example 9.6  In a car lift compressed air exerts a for ce F1 on a small piston having a radius of 5.0 cm. This pr essur e is transmitted to a second piston of radius 15 cm (Fig 9.7). If the mass of the car to be lifted is 1350 kg, calculate F1. What is the pressure necessary to accomplish this task? ( g = 9.8 ms-2). Answer  Since pr essur e is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid, = 1470 N ≈ 1.5 × 103 N The air pressure that will produce this force is This is almost double the atmospheric pressure.                       ⊳ Hydraulic brakes in automobiles also work on the same principle

.5 × 103 N The air pressure that will produce this force is This is almost double the atmospheric pressure.                       ⊳ Hydraulic brakes in automobiles also work on the same principle. When we apply a little force on the pedal with our foot the master piston moves inside the master cylinder , and the pressure caused is transmitted through the brake oil to act on a piston of larger area. A large force acts on the piston and is pushed down expanding the brake shoes against brake lining. In this way, a small force on the pedal produces a large retarding force on the wheel. Animportant advantage of the system is that the pressure set up by pressing pedal is transmitted equally to all cylinders attached to the four wheels so that the braking effort is equal on all wheels. 9.3  STREAMLINE FLOW So far we have studied fluids at rest. The study of the fluids in motion is known as fluid dynamics

. 9.3  STREAMLINE FLOW So far we have studied fluids at rest. The study of the fluids in motion is known as fluid dynamics. When a water tap is turned on slowly, the water flow is smooth initially, but loses its smoothness when the speed of the outflow is increased. In studying the motion of fluids, we focus our attention on what is happening to various fluid particles at a particular point in space at a particular time. The flow of the fluid is said to be steady  if at any given point, the velocity of each passing fluid particle remains constant in time. This does not mean that the velocity at different points in space is same. The velocity of a particular particle may change as it moves fr om one point to another . That is, at some other point the particle may have a different velocity, but every other particle which passes the second point behaves exactly as the previous particle that has just passed that point. Each particle follows a smooth path, and the paths of the particles do not cr oss each other

. Each particle follows a smooth path, and the paths of the particles do not cr oss each other . Fig. 9.7 The meaning of streamlines. (a) A typical trajectory of a fluid particle. (b) A region of streamline flow. The path taken by a fluid particle under a steady flow is a streamline . It is defined as a curve whose tangent at any point is in the direction of the fluid velocity at that point. Consider the path of a particle as shown in Fig.9.7 (a), the curve describes how a fluid particle moves with time. The curve PQ is like a 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 187 permanent map of fluid flow, indicating how the fluid streams. No two streamlines can cross, for if they do, an oncoming fluid particle can go either one way or the other and the flow would not be steady. Hence, in steady flow, the map of flow is stationary in time. How do we draw closely spaced streamlines ? If we intend to show streamline of every flowing particle, we would end up with a continuum of lines

. How do we draw closely spaced streamlines ? If we intend to show streamline of every flowing particle, we would end up with a continuum of lines. Consider planes perpendicular to the direction of fluid flow e.g., at thr ee points P , R and Q in Fig. 9.7 (b).  The plane pieces are so chosen that their boundaries be determined by the same set of streamlines. This means that number of fluid particles crossing the sur faces as indicated at P , R and Q is the same. If area of cross-sections at these points are AP,AR and AQ and speeds of fluid particles are vP, vR and vQ, then mass of fluid ∆mP crossing at AP in a small interval of time ∆t is ρPAPvP ∆t. Similarly mass of fluid ∆mR flowing or crossing at AR in a small interval of time ∆t is  ρRARvR ∆t and mass of fluid  ∆mQ is ρQAQvQ ∆t crossing at AQ. The mass of liquid flowing out equals the mass flowing in, holds in all cases. Therefore, ρPAPvP∆t = ρRARvR∆t = ρQAQvQ∆t (9.9) For flow of incompressible fluids ρP = ρR = ρQ Equation (9

. The mass of liquid flowing out equals the mass flowing in, holds in all cases. Therefore, ρPAPvP∆t = ρRARvR∆t = ρQAQvQ∆t (9.9) For flow of incompressible fluids ρP = ρR = ρQ Equation (9.9) reduces to APvP = ARvR = AQvQ(9.10) which is called the equation of continuity  and it is a statement of conservation of mass in flow of incompressible fluids. In general Av = constant (9.11) Av gives the volume flux or flow rate and remains constant throughout the pipe of flow. Thus, at narrower portions where the streamlines are closely spaced, velocity increases and its vice versa. From (Fig 9.7b) it is clear that AR  > AQ or   vR <  vQ, the fluid is accelerated while passing from R to Q. This is associated with a change in pressure in fluid flow in horizontal pipes. Steady flow is achieved at low flow speeds. Beyond a limiting value, called critical speed, this flow loses steadiness and becomes turbulent

. Steady flow is achieved at low flow speeds. Beyond a limiting value, called critical speed, this flow loses steadiness and becomes turbulent . One sees this when a fast flowing stream encounters rocks, small foamy whirlpool-like regions called ‘white water rapids are formed. Figure 9.8 displays streamlines for some typical flows. For example, Fig. 9.8(a) describes a laminar flow where the velocities at different points in the fluid may have different magnitudesbut their directions are parallel. Figure 9.8 (b) gives a sketch of turbulent flow. Fig. 9.8 (a) Some streamlines for fluid flow. (b) A jet of air striking a flat plate placed perpendicular to it. This is an example of turbulent flow. 9.4  BERNOULLI’S PRINCIPLE Fluid flow is a complex phenomenon. But we can obtain some useful properties for steady or streamline flows using the conservation of energy. Consider a fluid moving in a pipe of varying cross-sectional ar ea. Let the pipe be at varying heights as shown in Fig. 9.9

. Consider a fluid moving in a pipe of varying cross-sectional ar ea. Let the pipe be at varying heights as shown in Fig. 9.9. W e now suppose that an incompr essible fluid is flowing thr ough the pipe in a steady flow. Its velocity must change as a consequence of equation of continuity. A force is required to produce this acceleration, which is caused by the fluid surrounding it, the pressure must be different in different regions. Bernoulli’s equation is a general expression that relates the pressure difference between two points in a pipe to both velocity changes (kinetic energy change) and elevation (height) changes (potential energy change). The Swiss Physicist Daniel Bernoulli developed this relationship in 1738. Consider the flow at two regions 1 (i.e., BC) and 2 (i.e., DE). Consider the fluid initially lying between B and D. In an infinitesimal time interval ∆t, this fluid would have moved

. Consider the flow at two regions 1 (i.e., BC) and 2 (i.e., DE). Consider the fluid initially lying between B and D. In an infinitesimal time interval ∆t, this fluid would have moved. Suppose v1 is the speed at B and v2 at D, then fluid initially at B has moved a distance v1∆t to C ( v1∆t is small enough to assume constant cross-section along BC). In the same interval ∆t the fluid initially at D moves to E, a distance equal to v2∆t. Pressures P1 and P2 act as shown on the plane faces of areas A1 and A2 binding the two regions. The work done on the fluid at left end (BC) is W1 = P1A1(v1∆t) = P1∆V. Since the same volume ∆V passes through both the regions (from the equation of continuity) the work done by the fluid at the other end (DE) is W2 = P2A2(v2∆t) = P2∆V or, 2024-25  188 PHYSICS the work done on the fluid is  – P2∆V

. So the total work done on the fluid is W1 – W2 =  (P1− P2) ∆V Part of this work goes into changing the kinetic energy of the fluid, and part goes into changing the gravitational potential energy. If the density of the fluid is ρ and ∆m = ρA1v1∆t = ρ∆V is the mass passing through the pipe in time ∆t, then change in gravitational potential energy is ∆U = ρg∆V (h2 − h1) The change in its kinetic energy is ∆K = 1 2       ρ ∆V (v22 − v12) We can employ the work – ener gy theor em (Chapter 6) to this volume of the fluid and this yields (P1− P2) ∆V = 1 2       ρ ∆V (v22 − v12) + ρg∆V (h2 − h1) We now divide each ter m by ∆V to obtain (P1− P2) = 1 2       ρ (v22 − v12) + ρg (h2 − h1) We can r earrange the above ter ms to obtain P1 + 1 2       ρv12 + ρgh1 = P2+ 1 2       ρv22 + ρgh2      (9.12) This is Bernoulli’s equation . Since 1 and 2 refer to any two locations along the pipeline, we may write the expression in general as  P + 1 2      ρv2 + ρgh = constant (9

.12) This is Bernoulli’s equation . Since 1 and 2 refer to any two locations along the pipeline, we may write the expression in general as  P + 1 2      ρv2 + ρgh = constant (9.13)In words, the Bernoulli’s relation may be stated as follows: As we move along a streamline the sum of the pressure ( P), the kinetic energy per unit volume ρv2 2   and the potential energy per unit volume ( ρgh) remains a constant. Note that in applying the energy conservation principle, there is an assumption that no energy is lost due to friction. But in fact, when fluids flow, some energy does get lost due to internal friction. This arises due to the fact that in a fluid flow, the different layers of the fluid flow with different velocities. These layers exert frictional forces on each other resulting in a loss of energy. This property of the fluid is called viscosity and is discussed in more detail in a later section. The lost kinetic energy of the fluid gets converted into heat energy

. This property of the fluid is called viscosity and is discussed in more detail in a later section. The lost kinetic energy of the fluid gets converted into heat energy. Thus, Bernoulli’s equation ideally applies to fluids with zero viscosity or non- viscous fluids. Another restriction on application of Bernoulli theorem is that the fluids must be incompressible, as the elastic energy of the fluid is also not taken into consideration. In practice, it has a large number of useful applications and can help explain a wide variety of phenomena for low viscosity incompressible fluids. Bernoulli’s equation also does not hold for non- steady or turbulent flows, because in that situation velocity and pressure are constantly fluctuating in time. When a fluid is at rest i.e., its velocity is zero everywhere, Bernoulli’s equation becomes P1 + ρgh1 = P2 + ρgh2 (P1− P2) = ρg (h2 − h1) which is same as Eq. (9.6). 9.4.1 Speed of Efflux: Torricelli’s Law The word efflux means fluid outflow

. (9.6). 9.4.1 Speed of Efflux: Torricelli’s Law The word efflux means fluid outflow. Torricelli discover ed that the speed of ef flux fr om an open tank is given by a formula identical to that of a freely falling body. Consider a tank containing a liquid of density ρ with a small hole in its side at a height y1 from the bottom (see Fig. 9.10). The air above the liquid, whose surface is at height y2, is at pr essur e P. From the equation of continuity [Eq. (9.10)] we have v1 A1 = v2 A2 vA Av21 2=1Fig. 9.9 The flow of an ideal fluid in a pipe of varying cross section. The fluid in a section of length v1∆t moves to the section of length v2∆t in time ∆t. 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 189 If the cross-sectional area of the tank A2 is much larger than that of the hole ( A2 >>A1), then we may take the fluid to be approximately at rest at the top, i.e., v2 = 0. Now, applying the Bernoulli equation at points 1 and 2 and noting that at the hole P1 = Pa, the atmospheric pressure, we have from Eq. (9

.e., v2 = 0. Now, applying the Bernoulli equation at points 1 and 2 and noting that at the hole P1 = Pa, the atmospheric pressure, we have from Eq. (9.12) 2 1 1 21 2aP  v g y P g y             + ρ + ρ = +ρ Taking  y2 – y1 = h we have ( )22a 1P Pv g h     −= +ρ(9.14) When P >>Pa and 2 g h may be ignored, the speed of efflux is determined by the container pressure. Such a situation occurs in rocket propulsion. On the other hand, if the tank is open to the atmosphere, then P  = Pa and h g v   21= (9.15) This is also the speed of a freely falling body. Equation (9.15) represents Torricelli’s law . 9.4.2 Dynamic Lift Dynamic lift is the force that acts on a body, such as airplane wing, a hydrofoil or a spinning ball, by virtue of its motion through a fluid.  In many games such as cricket, tennis, baseball, or golf, we notice that a spinning ball deviatesfrom its parabolic trajectory as it moves through air. This deviation can be partly explained on the basis of Bernoulli’s principle

. This deviation can be partly explained on the basis of Bernoulli’s principle. (i)Ball moving without spin : Fig. 9.11(a) shows the streamlines around a non-spinning ball moving relative to a fluid. From the symmetry of streamlines it is clear that the velocity of fluid (air) above and below the ball at corresponding points is the same resulting in zero pressure difference. The air therefore, exerts no upward or downward force on the ball. (ii)Ball moving with spin : A ball which is spinning drags air along with it. If the surface is rough more air will be dragged. Fig 9.11(b) shows  the streamlines of air for a ball which is moving and spinning at the same time. The ball is moving forward and relative to it the air is moving backwards. Therefore, the velocity of air above the ball relative to the ball is larger and below it is smaller (see Section 9.3). The stream lines, thus, get crowded above and rarified below

. Therefore, the velocity of air above the ball relative to the ball is larger and below it is smaller (see Section 9.3). The stream lines, thus, get crowded above and rarified below. This difference in the velocities of air results in the pressure difference between the lower and upper faces and there is a net upward force on the ball. This dynamic lift due to spining is called Magnus effect . Aerofoil or lift on aircraft wing:  Figure 9.11 (c) shows an aerofoil, which is a solid piece shaped to provide an upward dynamic lift when it moves horizontally thr ough air . The cross-section of the wings of an aeroplane looks somewhat like the aerofoil shown in Fig. 9.11 (c) with streamlines around it. When the aerofoil moves against the wind, the orientation of the wing relative to flow direction causes the streamlines to crowd together above the wing more than those below it. The flow speed on top is higher than that below it

. The flow speed on top is higher than that below it. There is an upward force resulting in a dynamic lift of the wings and this balances the weight of the plane. The following example illustrates this.Fig. 9.10 Torricelli’s law. The speed of efflux, v1, from the side of the container is given by the application of Ber noulli’s equation. If the container is open at the top to the atmospher e then 1  2  hv g= . 2024-25  190 PHYSICS⊳ Example 9.7  A fully loaded Boeing aircraft has a mass of 3.3 × 105 kg. Its total wing area is 500 m2. It is in level flight with a speed of 960 km/h. (a) Estimate the pressure difference between the lower and upper surfaces of the wings (b) Estimate the fractional increase in the speed of the air on the upper surface of the wing relative to the lower surface. [The density of air is ρ = 1.2 kg m-3] Answer  (a) The weight of the Boeing aircraft is balanced by the upward force due to the pressure difference ∆P × A = 3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8 P∆= (3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8 m s–2) / 500 m2       = 6

.2 kg m-3] Answer  (a) The weight of the Boeing aircraft is balanced by the upward force due to the pressure difference ∆P × A = 3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8 P∆= (3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8 m s–2) / 500 m2       = 6.5 ×103 Nm-2 (b) W e ignor e the small height dif ference between the top and bottom sides in Eq. (9.12). The pressure difference between them is then ΔP v v=( )ρ 222 12– where v2 is the speed of air over the upper surface and v1 is the speed under the bottom surface. v vP v v2 1 2 12–()=+( )Δ ρ Taking the average speed(a) (b) (c) Fig 9.11 (a) Fluid streaming past a static sphere. (b) Streamlines for a fluid around a sphere spinning  clockwise. (c) Air flowing past an aer ofoil. vav = (v2 + v1)/2 = 960 km/h = 267 m s-1, we have v v vP v2 1 2– /()=av avΔ ρ≈ 0.08 The speed above the wing needs to be only 8 % higher than that below. ⊳ 9.5  VISCOSITY Most of the fluids are not ideal ones and offer some resistance to motion

.08 The speed above the wing needs to be only 8 % higher than that below. ⊳ 9.5  VISCOSITY Most of the fluids are not ideal ones and offer some resistance to motion. This resistance to fluid motion is like an internal friction analogous to friction when a solid moves on a surface. It is called  viscosity. This force exists when there is relative motion between layers of the liquid. Suppose we consider a fluid  like oil  enclosed between two glass plates as shown in Fig. 9 .12 (a). The bottom plate is fixed while the top plate  is moved with a constant velocity v relative to the fixed plate. If oil is replaced by honey, a greater force is required to move the plate with the same velocity. Hence we say that honey is more viscous than oil. The fluid in contact with a surface has the same velocity as that of the surfaces. Hence, the layer of the liquid in contact with top surface moves with a velocity v and the layer of the liquid in contact with the fixed surface is stationary

. Hence, the layer of the liquid in contact with top surface moves with a velocity v and the layer of the liquid in contact with the fixed surface is stationary. The velocities of layers increase uniformly from bottom (zero velocity) to the top layer (velocity v). For any layer of liquid, its upper layer pulls it forward while lower layer pulls it backward. This results in force between the layers. This 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 191⊳change of strain’ or ‘strain rate’ i.e. ∆x/(l ∆t) or v/l instead of strain itself. The coefficient of viscosity (pronounced ‘eta’) for a fluid is defined as the ratio of shearing stress to the strain rate. (9.16) The SI unit of viscosity is poiseiulle (Pl). Its other units are N s m-2 or Pa s. The dimensions of viscosity ar e [ML-1T-1]. Generally, thin liquids, like water , alcohol, etc., ar e less viscous than thick liquids, like coal tar , blood, glycerine, etc. The coefficients of viscosity for some common fluids ar e listed in T able 9.2

., ar e less viscous than thick liquids, like coal tar , blood, glycerine, etc. The coefficients of viscosity for some common fluids ar e listed in T able 9.2. W e point out two facts about blood and water that you may find interesting. As Table 9.2 indicates, blood is ‘thicker’ (mor e viscous) than water . Further , the relative viscosity ( η/ηwater) of blood remains constant between 0 oC and 37 oC.type of flow is known as laminar . The layers of liquid slide over one another as the pages of a book do when it is placed flat on a table and a horizontal for ce is applied to the top cover . When a fluid is flowing in a pipe or a tube, then  velocity of the liquid layer along the axis of the tube is maximum and  decreases  gradually as we move towards the walls where it becomes zero, Fig. 9.12 (b). The velocity on a cylindrical surface in a tube is constant. (a) (b) Fig 9

. 9.12 (b). The velocity on a cylindrical surface in a tube is constant. (a) (b) Fig 9.12  (a) A layer of liquid sandwiched between two parallel glass plates, in which the lower plate is fixed and the upper one is moving to the right with velocity v (b) velocity distribution for viscous flow in a pipe. On account of this motion, a portion of liquid, which at some instant has the shape ABCD, take the shape of AEFD after short interval of time ( ∆t). During this time interval the liquid has undergone a shear strain of ∆x/l. Since, the strain in a flowing fluid increases with time continuously. Unlike a solid, here the stress is found experimentally to depend on ‘rate ofFig. 9.13 Measurement of the coefficient of viscosity of a liquid. The viscosity of liquids decreases with temperature , while it increases in the case of gases. Example 9.8 A metal block of area 0.10 m2 is connected to a 0.010 kg mass via a string that passes over an ideal pulley (considered massless and frictionless), as in Fig. 9.13

. Example 9.8 A metal block of area 0.10 m2 is connected to a 0.010 kg mass via a string that passes over an ideal pulley (considered massless and frictionless), as in Fig. 9.13. A liquid with a film thickness of 0.30 mm is placed between the block and the table. When released the block moves to the right with a constant speed of 0.085 m s-1. Find the coefficient of viscosity of the liquid. 2024-25  192 PHYSICS⊳Answer  The metal block moves to the right because of the tension in the string. The tension T is equal in magnitude to the weight of the suspended mass m. Thus, the shear force  F  is F = T = mg = 0.010 kg × 9.8 m s–2 = 9.8 × 10-2 N Shear stress on the fluid = F/A = N/m2 Strain rate =      =    = 3.46 ×10-3 Pa s   ⊳ Table 9.2  The viscosities of some fluids Fluid T(oC) Viscosity (mPl) Water 20 1.0 100 0.3 Blood 37 2.7 Machine Oil 16 113 38 34 Glycerine 20 830 Honey – 200 Air 0 0.017 40 0.019 9.5.1 Stokes’ Law When a body falls through a fluid it drags the layer of the fluid in contact with it

.3 Blood 37 2.7 Machine Oil 16 113 38 34 Glycerine 20 830 Honey – 200 Air 0 0.017 40 0.019 9.5.1 Stokes’ Law When a body falls through a fluid it drags the layer of the fluid in contact with it. A relative motion between the different layers of the fluid is set and, as a result, the body experiences a retarding force. Falling of a raindrop and swinging of a pendulum bob are some common examples of such motion. It is seen that the viscous force is proportional to the velocity of the object and is opposite to the direction of motion. The other quantities on which the force F depends are viscosity η of the fluid and radius a of the sphere. Sir George G. Stokes (181 9– 1903), an English scientist enunciated clearly the viscous drag force F as 6F avη= π (9.17)This is known as Stokes’ law. W e shall not derive Stokes’ law. This law is an interesting example of retarding force, which is pr oportional to velocity. W e can study its consequences on an object falling through a viscous  medium

. This law is an interesting example of retarding force, which is pr oportional to velocity. W e can study its consequences on an object falling through a viscous  medium. W e consider a raindr op in air . It accelerates initially due to gravity. As the velocity increases, the retarding force also increases. Finally , when viscous force plus buoyant force becomes equal to  the force due to gravity, the net force becomes zero and so does the acceleration. The sphere (raindrop) then descends with a constant velocity. Thus , in equilibrium, this terminal velocity vt is given by 6πηavt = (4π/3) a3 (ρ-σ)g where ρ and σ are mass densities of sphere and the fluid, r espectively. W e obtain vt = 2a2 (ρ-σ)g / (9η) (9.18) So the terminal velocity vt depends on the square of the radius of the sphere and inversely on the viscosity of the medium. You may like to r efer back to Example 6.2 in this context. Example 9.9  The terminal velocity of a copper ball of radius 2.0 mm falling through a tank of oil at 20oC is 6

. You may like to r efer back to Example 6.2 in this context. Example 9.9  The terminal velocity of a copper ball of radius 2.0 mm falling through a tank of oil at 20oC is 6.5 cm s-1. Compute the viscosity of the oil at 20oC. Density of oil is 1.5 ×103 kg m-3, density of copper is 8.9 × 103 kg m-3. Answer  We have vt = 6.5 × 10-2 ms-1, a = 2 × 10-3 m, g = 9.8 ms-2,  ρ = 8.9 × 103 kg m-3, σ =1.5 ×103 kg m-3. From Eq. (9.18)    =  9.9 × 10-1 kg m–1 s–1⊳ 9.6  SURFACE TENSION You must have noticed that, oil and water do not mix; water wets you and me but not ducks; mercury does not wet glass but water sticks to it, oil rises up a cotton wick, inspite of gravity, 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 193 Fig. 9.14 Schematic picture of molecules in a liquid, at the surface and balance of forces. (a) Molecule inside a liquid. Forces on a molecule due to others are shown. Direction of arrows indicates attraction of repulsion. (b) Same, for a molecule at a surface

. (a) Molecule inside a liquid. Forces on a molecule due to others are shown. Direction of arrows indicates attraction of repulsion. (b) Same, for a molecule at a surface. (c) Balance of attractive (AI and repulsive (R) forces.Let us consider a molecule near the surface Fig. 9.14(b). Only lower half side of it is surrounded by liquid molecules. There is some negative potential energy due to these, but obviously it is less than that of a molecule in bulk, i.e., the one fully inside. Approximately it is half of the latter . Thus, molecules on a liquid surface have some extra energy in comparison to molecules in the interior . A liquid, thus, tends to have the least surface area which external conditions permit. Increasing surface area requires energy. Most surface phenomenon can be understood in terms of this fact. What is the energy required for having a molecule at the surface? As mentioned above, roughly it is half the energy required to remove it entirely from the liquid i.e., half the heat of evaporation

. What is the energy required for having a molecule at the surface? As mentioned above, roughly it is half the energy required to remove it entirely from the liquid i.e., half the heat of evaporation. Finally, what is a surface? Since a liquid consists of molecules moving about, there cannot be a perfectly sharp surface. The density of the liquid molecules drops rapidly to zero around z = 0 as we move along the direction indicated Fig 9.14 (c) in a distance of the order of a few molecular sizes. 9.6.2 Surface Energy and Surface Tension As we have discussed that an extra energy is associated with surface of liquids, the creation of more surface (spreading of surface) keeping other things like volume fixed requires aSap and water rise up to the top of the leaves of the tree, hair of a paint brush do not cling together when dry and even when dipped in water but form a fine tip when taken out of it. All these and many more such experiences are related with the free surfaces of liquids

. All these and many more such experiences are related with the free surfaces of liquids. As liquids have no definite shape but have a definite volume, they acquire a free surface when poured in a container . These sur faces  possess some additional  energy. This phenomenon is known as surface tension and it is concerned with only liquid as gases do not have free surfaces. Let us now understand this phenomena. 9.6.1 Surface  Energy A liquid stays together because of attraction between molecules. Consider a molecule well inside a liquid. The intermolecular distances are such that it is attracted to all the surrounding molecules [Fig. 9.14(a)]. This attraction results in a negative potential energy for the molecule, which depends on the number and distribution of molecules around the chosen one. But the average potential energy of all the molecules is the same

. But the average potential energy of all the molecules is the same. This is supported by the fact that to take a collection of such molecules (the liquid) and to disperse them far away from each other in order to evaporate or vaporise, the heat of evaporation required is quite large. For water it is of the order of 40 kJ/mol. 2024-25  194 PHYSICS horizontal liquid film ending in bar free to slide over parallel guides Fig (9.15). Fig. 9.15 Stretching a film. (a) A film in equilibrium; (b) The film stretched an extra distance. Suppose that we move the bar by a small distance d as shown. Since the area of the surface increases, the system now has more energy, this means that some work has been done against an internal force. Let this internal force be F, the work done by the applied for ce is F.d = Fd. From conservation of ener gy, this is stored as additional energy in the film. If the surface energy of the film is S per unit area, the extra area is 2 dl

.d = Fd. From conservation of ener gy, this is stored as additional energy in the film. If the surface energy of the film is S per unit area, the extra area is 2 dl. A film has two sides and the liquid in between, so there are two surfaces and the extra energy is S (2dl) = Fd (9.19) Or, S=Fd/2 dl = F/2l (9.20) This quantity S is the magnitude of surface tension. It is equal to the surface energy per unit area of the liquid interface and is also equal to the force per unit length exerted by the fluid on the movable bar . So far we have talked about the surface of one liquid. More generally, we need to consider fluid surface in contact with other fluids or solid surfaces. The surface energy in that case depends on the materials on both sides of the surface. For example, if the molecules of the materials attract each other , surface ener gy is reduced while if they repel each other the surface energy is increased

. For example, if the molecules of the materials attract each other , surface ener gy is reduced while if they repel each other the surface energy is increased. Thus, more appropriately, the surface energy is the energy of the interface between two materials and depends on both of them. We make the following observations from above: (i)Surface tension is a force per unit length (or surface energy per unit area) acting in the plane of the interface between the plane of the liquid and any other substance; it also is the extra energy that the molecules at the interface have as compared to molecules in the interior . (ii)At any point on the interface besides the boundary, we can draw a line and imagine equal and opposite surface tension forces S per unit length of the line acting perpendicular to the line, in the plane of the interface. The line is in equilibrium. To be more specific, imagine a line of atoms or molecules at the surface

. The line is in equilibrium. To be more specific, imagine a line of atoms or molecules at the surface. The atoms to the left pull the line towards them; those to the right pull it towards them! This line of atoms is in equilibrium under tension. If the line really marks the end of the interface, as in Figure 9.14 (a) and (b) there is only the force S per unit length acting inwards. Table 9.3 gives the surface tension of various liquids. The value of surface tension depends on temperature. Like viscosity, the surface tension of a liquid usually falls with temperature. Table 9.3 Surface tension of some liquids at the temperatures indicated with the heats of the vaporisation Liquid Temp (oC) Surface Heat of Tension vaporisation  (N/m)  (kJ/mol) Helium –270 0.000239 0.115 Oxygen –183 0.0132 7.1 Ethanol 20 0.0227 40.6 Water 20 0.0727 44.16 Mercury 20 0.4355 63

.000239 0.115 Oxygen –183 0.0132 7.1 Ethanol 20 0.0227 40.6 Water 20 0.0727 44.16 Mercury 20 0.4355 63.2 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 195 A fluid will stick to a solid surface if the surface energy between fluid and the solid is smaller than the sum of surface energies between solid-air , and fluid-air . Now ther e is attraction between the solid surface and the liquid. It can be directly measured experimentaly as schematically shown in Fig. 9.16. A flat vertical glass plate, below which a vessel of some liquid is kept, forms one arm of the balance. The plate is balanced by weights on the other side, with its horizontal edge just over water . The vessel is raised slightly till the liquid just touches the glass plate and pulls it down a little because of sur face tension. W eights are added till the plate just clears water . Fig. 9.16  Measuring Surface Tension. Suppose the additional weight r equir ed is W. Then from Eq. 9

. W eights are added till the plate just clears water . Fig. 9.16  Measuring Surface Tension. Suppose the additional weight r equir ed is W. Then from Eq. 9.20 and the discussion given there, the surface tension of the liquid-air interface is Sla = (W/2l) = (mg/2l ) (9.21) where m is the extra mass and l is the length of the plate edge. The subscript (la) emphasises the fact that the liquid-air interface tension is involved. 9.6.3 Angle of Contact The surface of liquid near the plane of contact, with another medium is in general curved. The angle between tangent to the liquid surface at the point of contact and solid surface inside the liquid is termed as angle of contact. It is denotedby θ. It is different at interfaces of different pairs of liquids and solids. The value of θ determines whether a liquid will spread on the surface of a solid or it will form droplets on it. For example, water forms droplets on lotus leaf as shown in Fig. 9.17 (a) while spreads over a clean plastic plate as shown in Fig. 9

. For example, water forms droplets on lotus leaf as shown in Fig. 9.17 (a) while spreads over a clean plastic plate as shown in Fig. 9.17(b). (a) (b) Fig. 9.17 Different shapes of water drops with interfacial tensions (a) on a lotus leaf (b) on a clean plastic plate. We consider the thr ee inter facial tensions at all the thr ee inter faces, liquid-air , solid-air and solid-liquid denoted by  Sla, Ssa and Ssl , respectively as given in Fig. 9.17 (a) and (b). A t the line of contact, the surface forces between the three media must be in equilibrium. From the Fig. 9.17(b) the following relation is easily derived. Sla cos θ  +  Ssl =  Ssa(9.22) The angle of contact is an obtuse angle if Ssl  > Sla as in the case of water -leaf inter face while it is an acute angle if Ssl  < Sla as in the case of water -plastic inter face

.22) The angle of contact is an obtuse angle if Ssl  > Sla as in the case of water -leaf inter face while it is an acute angle if Ssl  < Sla as in the case of water -plastic inter face. When θ is an obtuse angle then molecules of liquids are attracted strongly to themselves and weakly to those of solid, it costs a lot of energy to create a liquid-solid surface, and liquid then does not wet the solid. This is what happens with water on a waxy or oily surface, and with mercury on 2024-25  196 PHYSICS any surface. On the other hand, if the molecules of the liquid are strongly attracted to those of the solid, this will reduce Ssl and therefore, cos θ may increase or θ may decrease. In this case θ is an acute angle. This is what happens for water on glass or on plastic and for kerosene oil on virtually anything (it just spreads). Soaps, detergents and dying substances are wetting agents. When they are added the angle of contact becomes small so that these may penetrate well and become ef fective

. Soaps, detergents and dying substances are wetting agents. When they are added the angle of contact becomes small so that these may penetrate well and become ef fective. W ater proofing agents on the other hand are added to create a large angle of contact between the water and fibres. 9.6.4 Drops and Bubbles One consequence of surface tension is that free liquid drops and bubbles are spherical if effects of gravity can be neglected. Y ou must have seen this especially clearly in small drops just formed in a high-speed spray or jet, and in soap bubbles blown by most of us in childhood. Why are drops and bubbles spherical? What keeps soap bubbles stable? As we have been saying repeatedly, a liquid- air interface has energy, so for a given volume the surface with minimum energy is the one with the least area. The sphere has this property. Though it is out of the scope of this book, but you can check that a sphere is better than at least a cube in this respect! So, if gravity and other forces (e.g

. The sphere has this property. Though it is out of the scope of this book, but you can check that a sphere is better than at least a cube in this respect! So, if gravity and other forces (e.g. air resistance) were ineffective, liquid drops would be spherical. Another interesting consequence of surface tension is that the pressure inside a spherical drop Fig. 9.18(a) is more than the pressure outside. Suppose a spherical drop of radius r is in equilibrium. If its radius incr ease by ∆r. The extra surface energy is [4π(r + ∆r) 2- 4πr2] Sla = 8πr ∆r Sla(9.23) If the drop is in equilibrium this energy cost is balanced by the energy gain due to expansion under the pressure difference ( Pi – Po) between the inside of the bubble and the outside. The work done is W = (Pi – Po) 4πr2∆r (9.24)so that (Pi – Po) = (2 Sla/ r) (9.25) In general, for a liquid-gas interface, the convex side has a higher pressure than the concave side. For example, an air bubble in a liquid, would have higher pressure inside it. See Fig 9

.25) In general, for a liquid-gas interface, the convex side has a higher pressure than the concave side. For example, an air bubble in a liquid, would have higher pressure inside it. See Fig 9.18 (b). Fig. 9.18  Drop, cavity and bubble of radius r . A bubble Fig 9.18 (c) differs from a drop and a cavity; in this it has two interfaces. Applying the above argument we have for a bubble  (Pi – Po) = (4 Sla/ r) (9.26) This is probably why you have to blow hard, but not too hard, to form a soap bubble. A little extra air pressure is needed inside! 9.6.5 Capillary Rise One consequence of the pressure difference across a curved liquid-air interface is the well- known effect that water rises up in a narrow tube in spite of gravity. The word capilla means hair in Latin; if the tube were hair thin, the rise would be very large. To see this, consider a vertical capillary tube of circular cross section (radius a) inserted into an open vessel of water (Fig. 9.19). The contact angle between water and Fig. 9

. To see this, consider a vertical capillary tube of circular cross section (radius a) inserted into an open vessel of water (Fig. 9.19). The contact angle between water and Fig. 9.19 Capillary rise, (a) Schematic picture of a narrow tube immersed water . (b) Enlarged picture near interface. 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 197⊳ glass is acute. Thus the surface of water in the capillary is concave.  This means that there is a pressure difference between the two sides of the top surface. This is given by (Pi – Po) =(2S/r) = 2S/(a sec θ) = (2S/a) cos θ (9.27) Thus the pressure of the water inside the tube, just at the meniscus (air-water interface) is less than the atmospheric pressure. Consider the two points A and B in Fig. 9.19(a). They must be at the same pressure, namely P0 + h ρ g = Pi = PA(9.28) where ρ ρρ ρρ is the density of water and h is called the capillary rise  [Fig. 9.19(a)]. Using Eq. (9.27) and (9.28) we have h ρ g = (Pi – P0) = (2S cos θ )/a    (9.29) The discussion here, and the Eqs

. 9.19(a)]. Using Eq. (9.27) and (9.28) we have h ρ g = (Pi – P0) = (2S cos θ )/a    (9.29) The discussion here, and the Eqs. (9.24) and (9.25) make it clear that the capillary rise is due to sur face tension. It is lar ger, for a smaller a. Typically it is of the order of a few cm for fine capillaries. For example, if a = 0.05 cm, using the value of surface tension for water (Table 9.3), we find that h = 2S/(ρ g a)   -1 3 -3 -2 -42×(0.073 N m )=(10 kg m ) (9.8 m s )(5 × 10 m)   = 2.98 × 10–2 m = 2.98 cm Notice that if the liquid meniscus is convex, as for mercury, i.e., if cos  θ is negative then from Eq. (9.28) for example, it is clear that the liquid will be lower in the capillary !Example 9.10  The lower end of a capillary tube of diameter 2.00 mm is dipped 8.00 cm below the sur face of water in a beaker . What is the pressure required in the tube in order to blow a hemispherical bubble at its end in water? The surface tension of water at temperature of the experiments is 7.30 × 10-2 Nm-1

. What is the pressure required in the tube in order to blow a hemispherical bubble at its end in water? The surface tension of water at temperature of the experiments is 7.30 × 10-2 Nm-1. 1 atmospheric pressure = 1.01  × 105 Pa, density of water = 1000 kg/m3, g = 9.80 m  s-2. Also calculate the excess pressure. Answer  The excess pressure in a bubble of gas in a liquid is given by 2 S/r, wher e S is the surface tension of the liquid-gas inter face. Y ou should note there is only one liquid surface in this case. (For a bubble of liquid in a gas, there are two liquid surfaces, so the formula for excess pr essur e in that case is 4 S/r.) The radius of the bubble is r . Now the pr essur e outside the bubble Po equals atmospheric pressure plus the pressure due to 8.00 cm of water column. That is Po = (1.01  × 105 Pa + 0.08 m  × 1000 kg m–3     × 9.80 m s–2)     = 1.01784  × 105 Pa Therefore, the pressure inside the bubble is   Pi  = Po + 2S/r = 1.01784  × 105 Pa + (2 × 7.3 × 10-2 Pa m/10-3 m) = (1.01784 + 0

.08 m  × 1000 kg m–3     × 9.80 m s–2)     = 1.01784  × 105 Pa Therefore, the pressure inside the bubble is   Pi  = Po + 2S/r = 1.01784  × 105 Pa + (2 × 7.3 × 10-2 Pa m/10-3 m) = (1.01784 + 0.00146)  × 105  Pa = 1.02   × 105 Pa where the radius of the bubble is taken to be equal to the radius of the capillary tube, since the bubble is hemispherical ! (The answer has been rounded off to three significant figures.) The excess pressure in the bubble is 146 Pa. ⊳ SUMMARY 1. The basic property of a fluid is that it can flow. The fluid does not have any resistance to change of its shape. Thus, the shape of a fluid is governed by the shape of its container . 2. A liquid is incompressible and has a free surface of its own. A gas is compressible and it expands to occupy all the space available to it. 3. If F is the normal force exerted by a fluid on an area A then the average pressure Pav is defined as the ratio of the force to area AFPav= 2024-25  198 PHYSICS 4. The unit of the pressure is the pascal (Pa)

. The unit of the pressure is the pascal (Pa). It is the same as N m-2. Other common units of pressure are 1 atm = 1.01 ×105 Pa 1 bar = 105 Pa 1 torr = 133 Pa = 0.133 kPa 1 mm of Hg = 1 torr = 133 Pa 5. Pascal’s law  states that: Pressure in a fluid at rest is same at all points which are at the same height. A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished to every point of the fluid and the walls of the containing vessel. 6. The pressure in a fluid varies with depth h according to the expression P = Pa + ρgh where  ρ is the density of the fluid, assumed uniform. 7. The volume of an incompressible fluid passing any point every second in a pipe of non uniform crossection is the same in the steady flow. v A = constant ( v is the velocity and A is the area of crossection) The equation is due to mass conservation in incompressible fluid flow. 8

. v A = constant ( v is the velocity and A is the area of crossection) The equation is due to mass conservation in incompressible fluid flow. 8. Bernoulli’s principle  states that as we move along a streamline, the sum of the pressure ( P), the kinetic energy per unit volume ( ρv2/2) and the potential energy per unit volume ( ρgy) remains a constant. P + ρv2/2 + ρgy = constant The equation is basically the conservation of energy applied to non viscuss fluid motion in steady state. There is no fluid which have zero viscosity, so the above statement is true only approximately. The viscosity is like friction and converts the kinetic energy to heat energy. 9. Though shear strain in a fluid does not require shear stress, when a shear stress is applied to a fluid, the motion is generated which causes a shear strain growing with time. The ratio of the shear stress to the time rate of shearing strain is known as coefficient of viscosity, η. where symbols have their usual meaning and are defined in the text. 10

. The ratio of the shear stress to the time rate of shearing strain is known as coefficient of viscosity, η. where symbols have their usual meaning and are defined in the text. 10. Stokes’ law  states that the viscous drag force F on a sphere of radius a moving with velocity v through a fluid of viscosity is, F = 6 πηav. 11. Surface tension is a force per unit length (or surface energy per unit area) acting in the plane of interface between the liquid and the bounding surface. It is the extra energy that the molecules at the inter face have as compar ed to the interior . POINTS TO PONDER 1. Pressure is a scalar quantity . The definition of the pressure as “force per unit area” may give one false impr ession that pr essur e is a vector . The “for ce” in the numerator of the definition is the component of the force normal to the area upon which it is impressed. While describing fluids as a concept, shift from particle and rigid body mechanics is r equir ed

. While describing fluids as a concept, shift from particle and rigid body mechanics is r equir ed. W e are concer ned with pr operties that vary fr om point to point in the fluid. 2.  One should not think of pressure of a fluid as being exerted only on a solid like the walls of a container or a piece of solid matter immersed in the fluid. Pressure exists at all points in a fluid. An element of a fluid (such as the one shown in Fig. 9.4) is in equilibrium because the pressures exerted on the various faces are equal. 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 199 3. The expression for pressure P = Pa + ρgh holds true if fluid is incompressible. Practically speaking it holds for liquids, which are largely incompressible and hence  is a constant with height. 4. The gauge pressure is the difference of the actual pressure and the atmospheric pressure. P – Pa = Pg Many pressure-measuring devices measure the gauge pressure. These include the tyre pressure gauge and the blood pressure gauge (sphygmomanometer). 5

. P – Pa = Pg Many pressure-measuring devices measure the gauge pressure. These include the tyre pressure gauge and the blood pressure gauge (sphygmomanometer). 5. A streamline is a map of fluid flow. In a steady flow two streamlines do not intersect as it means that the fluid particle will have two possible velocities at the point. 6. Bernoulli’s principle does not hold in presence of viscous drag on the fluid. The work done by this dissipative viscous force must be taken into account in this case, and P2 [Fig. 9.9] will be lower than the value given by Eq. (9.12). 7. As the temperature rises the atoms of the liquid become more mobile and the coefficient of viscosity, η  falls. In a gas the temperature rise increases the random motion of atoms and η  increases. 8. Surface tension arises due to excess potential energy of the molecules on the surface in comparison to their potential ener gy in the interior

. 8. Surface tension arises due to excess potential energy of the molecules on the surface in comparison to their potential ener gy in the interior . Such a sur face ener gy is pr esent at the interface separating two substances at least one of which is a fluid. It is not the property of a single fluid alone. EXERCISES 9.1 Explain why (a)The blood pressure in humans is greater at the feet than at the brain (b)Atmospheric pressure at a height of about 6 km decreases to nearly half of its value at the sea level, though the height of the atmosphere is more than 100 km (c)Hydrostatic pressure is a scalar quantity even though pressure is force divided by area. 9.2 Explain why (a)The angle of contact of mercury with glass is obtuse, while that of water with glass is acute. (b)Water on a clean glass sur face tends to spr ead out while mer cury on the same surface tends to form drops. (Put differently, water wets glass while mercury does not

. (b)Water on a clean glass sur face tends to spr ead out while mer cury on the same surface tends to form drops. (Put differently, water wets glass while mercury does not.) 2024-25  200 PHYSICS (c)Surface tension of a liquid is independent of the area of the surface (d)Water with deter gent disolved in it should have small angles of contact. (e)A drop of liquid under no external forces is always spherical in shape 9.3 Fill in the blanks using the word(s) from the list appended with each statement: (a)Surface tension of liquids generally ... with temperatures (increases / decreases) (b)Viscosity of gases ... with temperature, whereas viscosity of   liquids  ...  with temperature (increases / decreases) (c)For solids with elastic modulus of rigidity, the shearing force is proportional to ... , while for fluids it is proportional to ..

...  with temperature (increases / decreases) (c)For solids with elastic modulus of rigidity, the shearing force is proportional to ... , while for fluids it is proportional to ... (shear strain / rate of shear strain) (d)For a fluid in a stead y flow, the increase in flow speed at a constriction follows (conservation of mass / Bernoulli’s principle) (e)For the model of  a plane in a wind tunnel, turbulence occurs at a ... speed for turbulence for an actual plane (greater / smaller) 9.4 Explain why (a)To keep a piece of paper horizontal, you should blow over , not under , it (b)When we try to close a water tap with our fingers, fast jets of water gush through the openings between our fingers (c)The size of the needle of a syringe controls flow rate better than the thumb pressure exerted by a doctor while administering an injection (d)A fluid flowing out of a small hole in a vessel results in a backward thrust on the vessel (e)A spinning cricket ball in air does not follow a parabolic trajectory 9

.5 A 50 kg girl wearing high heel shoes balances on a single heel. The heel is circular with a diameter 1.0 cm. What is the pressure exerted by the heel on the horizontal floor ? 9.6 Toricelli’s barometer used mercury. Pascal duplicated it using French wine of density 984 kg m–3. Determine the height of the wine column for normal atmospheric pressure. 9.7 A vertical off-shore structure is built to withstand a maximum stress of 109 Pa. Is the structure suitable for putting up on top of an oil well in the ocean ? Take the depth of the ocean to be roughly 3 km, and ignore ocean currents. 9.8 A hydraulic automobile lift is designed to lift cars with a maximum mass of 3000 kg. The area of cross-section of the piston carrying the load is 425 cm2. What maximum pressure would the smaller piston have to bear ? 9.9 A U-tube contains water and methylated spirit separated by mercury. The mercury columns in the two arms are in level with 10.0 cm of water in one arm and 12.5 cm of spirit in the other

.9 A U-tube contains water and methylated spirit separated by mercury. The mercury columns in the two arms are in level with 10.0 cm of water in one arm and 12.5 cm of spirit in the other . What is the specific gravity of spirit ? 9.10 In the previous problem, if 15.0 cm of water and spirit each are further poured into the respective arms of the tube, what is the difference in the levels of mercury in the two arms ? (Specific gravity of mercury = 13.6) 9.11 Can Bernoulli’s equation be used to describe the flow of water through a rapid in a river ? Explain. 9.12 Does it matter if one uses gauge instead of absolute pressures in applying Bernoulli’s equation ? Explain. 9.13 Glycerine flows steadily through a horizontal tube of length 1.5 m and radius 1.0 cm. If the amount of glycerine collected per second at one end is 4.0 × 10–3 kg s–1, what is the pressure difference between the two ends of the tube ? (Density of glycerine = 1.3 × 103 kg m–3 and viscosity of glycerine = 0.83 Pa s)

.0 × 10–3 kg s–1, what is the pressure difference between the two ends of the tube ? (Density of glycerine = 1.3 × 103 kg m–3 and viscosity of glycerine = 0.83 Pa s). [Y ou may also like to check if the assumption of laminar flow in the tube is correct]. 9.14 In a test experiment on a model aeroplane in a wind tunnel, the flow speeds on the upper and lower surfaces of the wing are 70 m s–1and 63 m s-1 respectively. What is the lift on the wing if its area is 2.5 m2 ? Take the density of air to be 1.3 kg m–3. 9.15 Figures 9.20(a) and (b) refer to the steady flow of a (non-viscous) liquid. Which of the two figur es is incorr ect? Why ? 2024-25  MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 201 Fig. 9.20 9.16 The cylindrical tube of a spray pump has a cross-section of 8.0 cm2 one end of which has 40 fine holes each of diameter 1.0 mm. If the liquid flow inside the tube is 1.5 m min–1, what is the speed of ejection of the liquid through the holes ? 9.17 A U-shaped wire is dipped in a soap solution, and removed

.0 mm. If the liquid flow inside the tube is 1.5 m min–1, what is the speed of ejection of the liquid through the holes ? 9.17 A U-shaped wire is dipped in a soap solution, and removed. The thin soap film formed between the wire and the light slider supports a weight of 1.5 × 10–2 N (which includes the small weight of the slider). The length of the slider is 30 cm. What is the surface tension of the film ? 9.18 Figure 9.21 (a) shows a thin liquid film supporting a small weight = 4.5 × 10–2 N. What is the weight supported by a film of the same liquid at the same temperature in Fig. (b) and (c) ? Explain your answer physically. Fig. 9.21 9.19 What is the pressure inside the drop of mercury of radius 3.00 mm at room temperature ? Surface  tension of mercury  at that temperature  (20 °C) is 4.65 × 10–1 N m–1. The atmospheric pressure is 1.01 × 105 Pa. Also give the excess pressure inside the drop. 9.20 What is the excess pressure inside a bubble of soap solution of radius 5

.65 × 10–1 N m–1. The atmospheric pressure is 1.01 × 105 Pa. Also give the excess pressure inside the drop. 9.20 What is the excess pressure inside a bubble of soap solution of radius 5.00 mm, given that the surface tension of soap solution at the temperature (20 °C) is 2.50 × 10–2 N m–1? If an air bubble of the same dimension were formed at depth of 40.0 cm inside a container containing the soap solution (of relative density 1.20), what would be the pressure inside the bubble ? (1 atmospheric pressure is  1.01 × 105 Pa). 2024-25  CHAPTER  TEN THERMAL  PROPERTIES  OF MATTER 10.1  INTRODUCTION We all have common sense notions of heat and temperatur e. Temperatur e is a measur e of ‘hotness’ of a body. A kettle with boiling water is hotter than a box containing ice. In physics, we need to define the notion of heat, temperatur e, etc., mor e carefully. In this chapter , you will lear n what heat is and how it is measured, and study the various pr oceses by which heat flows fr om one body to another

., mor e carefully. In this chapter , you will lear n what heat is and how it is measured, and study the various pr oceses by which heat flows fr om one body to another . Along the way, you will find out why blacksmiths heat the ir on ring befor e fitting on the rim of a wooden wheel of a horse cart and why the wind at the beach often reverses direction after the sun goes down. Y ou will also lear n what happens when water boils or freezes, and its temperature does not change during these processes even though a great deal of heat is flowing into or out of it. 10.2  TEMPERATURE AND HEAT We can begin studying ther mal pr operties of matter with definitions of temperatur e and heat. Temperatur e is a r elative measur e, or indication of hotness or coldness. A hot utensil is said to have a high temperatur e, and ice cube to have a low temperatur e. An object that has a higher temperatur e than another object is said to be hotter . Note that hot and cold ar e relative ter ms, like tall and short

. An object that has a higher temperatur e than another object is said to be hotter . Note that hot and cold ar e relative ter ms, like tall and short. W e can per ceive temperature by touch. However , this temperatur e sense is somewhat unr eliable and its range is too limited to be useful for scientific purposes. We know fr om experience that a glass of ice-cold water left on a table on a hot summer day eventually war ms up wher eas a cup of hot tea on the same table cools down. It means that when the temperatur e of body, ice-cold water or hot tea in this case, and its surr ounding medium ar e different, heat transfer takes place between the system and the surr ounding medium, until the body and the surr ounding medium ar e at the same temperatur e. We also know that in the case of glass tumbler of ice-cold water , heat flows fr om the envir onment to10.1 Introduction 10.2 Temperature and heat 10.3 Measurement of temperature 10.4 Ideal-gas equation and absolute temperature 10.5 Thermal expansion 10

.1 Introduction 10.2 Temperature and heat 10.3 Measurement of temperature 10.4 Ideal-gas equation and absolute temperature 10.5 Thermal expansion 10.6 Specific heat capacity 10.7 Calorimetry 10.8 Change of state 10.9 Heat transfer 10.10 Newton’s law of cooling Summary Points to ponder Exercises Additional Exercises 2024-25  the glass tumbler , wher eas in the case of hot tea, it flows fr om the cup of hot tea to the envir onment. So, we can say that heat is the form of energy transferred between two (or more) systems or a system and its surroundings by virtue of temperature difference.  The SI unit of heat ener gy transferr ed is expr essed in joule (J) while SI unit of temperature is Kelvin (K), and degree Celsius (oC) is a commonly used unit of temperature. When an object is heated, many changes may take place. Its temperature may rise, it may expand or change state. W e will study the ef fect of heat on different bodies in later sections. 10

. When an object is heated, many changes may take place. Its temperature may rise, it may expand or change state. W e will study the ef fect of heat on different bodies in later sections. 10.3  MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE A measure of temperature is obtained using a thermometer . Many physical pr operties of materials change sufficiently with temperature. Some such properties are used as the basis for constructing thermometers. The commonly used property is variation of the volume of a liquid with temperature. For example, in common liquid–in–glass thermometers,  mercury, alcohol etc., are used whose volume varies linearly with temperature over a wide range.     Thermometers are calibrated so that a numerical value may be assigned to a given temperature in an appropr iate scale. For the definition of any standard scale, two fixed reference points are needed. Since all substances change dimensions with temperature, an absolute reference for expansion is not available

. For the definition of any standard scale, two fixed reference points are needed. Since all substances change dimensions with temperature, an absolute reference for expansion is not available. However , the necessary fixed points may be correlated to the physical phenomena that always occur at the same temperature. The ice point and the steam point of water are two convenient fixed points and are known as the freezing and boiling points , respectively. These two points are the temperatures at which pure water freezes and boils under standard pressure. The two familiar temperature scales are the Fahrenheit temperature scale and the Celsius temperature scale. The ice and steam point have values 32 °F and 212  °F, respectively, on the Fahr enheit scale and 0 °C and 100 °C on the Celsius scale. On the Fahrenheit scale, there are 180 equal intervals between two reference points, and on the Celsius scale, there are 100.Fig. 10.1 A plot of Fah renheit temperature (tF) versus Celsius temperatur e (tc)

.Fig. 10.1 A plot of Fah renheit temperature (tF) versus Celsius temperatur e (tc).  A relationship for converting between the two scales may be obtained fr om a graph of Fahr enheit temperatur e (tF) versus celsius temperature (tC) in a straight line (Fig. 10.1), whose equation is t tF C – 32 180 100= (10.1) 10.4 IDEAL-GAS EQUATION AND ABSOLUTE TEMPERATURE Liquid-in-glass thermometers show different readings for temperatur es other than the fixed points because of dif fering expansion pr operties. A ther mometer that uses a gas, however , gives the same r eadings r egardless of which gas is used. Experiments show that all gases at low densities exhibit same expansion behaviour . The variables that describe the behaviour of a given quantity (mass) of gas ar e pressur e, volume, and temperature ( P, V, and T)(wher e T = t + 273.15; t is the temperature in °C). When temperature is held constant, the pr essur e and volume of a quantity of gas ar e related as  PV = constant

.15; t is the temperature in °C). When temperature is held constant, the pr essur e and volume of a quantity of gas ar e related as  PV = constant. This r elationship is known as Boyle’s law, after Robert Boyle (1627–1691), the English Chemist who discover ed it. When the pr essur e is held constant, the volume of a quantity of the gas is related to the temperatur e as V/T = constant. This relationship is known as Charles’ law, after  French scientist Jacques Charles (1747– 1823). Low-density gases obey these laws, which may be combined into a singleTHERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 203 2024-25  204 PHYSICS named after the British scientist Lord Kelvin. On this scale, – 273.15 °C is taken as the zero point, that is 0 K (Fig. 10.4). The size of unit in Kelvin and Celsius temperature scales is the same.  So, temperature on these scales are related by T = tC + 273.15 (10.3) 10

. 10.4). The size of unit in Kelvin and Celsius temperature scales is the same.  So, temperature on these scales are related by T = tC + 273.15 (10.3) 10.5  THERMAL EXPANSION You may have observed that sometimes sealed bottles with metallic lids are so tightly screwed that one has to put the lid in hot water for some time to open it. This would allow the metallic lid to expand, thereby loosening it to unscrew easily. In case of liquids, you may have observed that mercury in a thermometer rises, when the thermometer is put in slightly war m water . If we take out the thermometer from the warmFig. 10.2 Pressure versus temperature of a low density gas kept at constant volume.Fig. 10.3 A plot of pressure versus temperature and extrapolation of lines for low density gases indicates the same absolute zer o temperatur e. Fig. 10.4 Comparision of the Kelvin, Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatur e scales.relationship

. Fig. 10.4 Comparision of the Kelvin, Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatur e scales.relationship.  Notice that since PV = constant and V/T = constant for a given quantity of gas, then PV/T should also be a constant. This relationship is known as ideal gas law. It can be written in a more general form that applies not just to a given quantity of a single gas but to any quantity of any low-density gas and is known as ideal-gas equation : or PV = µRT (10.2) where, µ is the number of moles in the sample of gas and R is called universal gas constant: R = 8.31 J mol–1 K–1 In Eq. 10.2, we have learnt that the pressure and volume ar e dir ectly pr oportional to temperature : PV ∝  T. This relationship allows a gas to be used to measur e temperatur e in a constant volume gas ther mometer . Holding the volume of a gas constant, it gives P ∝T. Thus, with a constant-volume gas ther mometer , temperature is r ead in ter ms of pr essur e

. Holding the volume of a gas constant, it gives P ∝T. Thus, with a constant-volume gas ther mometer , temperature is r ead in ter ms of pr essur e. A plot of pressur e versus temperatur e gives a straight line in this case, as shown in Fig. 10.2. However , measur ements on r eal gases deviate from the values pr edicted by the ideal gas law at low temperatur e. But the r elationship is linear over a lar ge temperatur e range, and it looks as though the pressur e might r each zer o with decreasing temperatur e if the gas continued to be a gas. The absolute minimum temperatur e for an ideal gas, ther efore, inferr ed by extrapolating the straight line to the axis, as in Fig. 10.3.  This temperature is found to be – 273.15 °C and is designated as absolute zero . Absolute zer o is the foundation of the Kelvin temperatur e scale or absolute scale temperatur e 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 205 water the level of mercury falls again

. Absolute zer o is the foundation of the Kelvin temperatur e scale or absolute scale temperatur e 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 205 water the level of mercury falls again. Similarly, in case of gases, a balloon partially inflated in a cool room may expand to full size when placed in war m water . On the other hand, a fully inflated balloon when immersed in cold water would start shrinking due to contraction of the air inside. It is our common experience that most substances expand on heating and contract on cooling. A change in the temperatur e of a body causes change in its dimensions. The incr ease in the dimensions of a body due to the incr ease in its temperature is called ther mal expansion. The expansion in length is called linear expansion . The expansion in ar ea is called area expansion. The expansion in volume is called volume expansion  (Fig. 10.5). Fig. 10.5   Thermal Expansion

. The expansion in length is called linear expansion . The expansion in ar ea is called area expansion. The expansion in volume is called volume expansion  (Fig. 10.5). Fig. 10.5   Thermal Expansion. If the substance is in the for m of a long r od, then for small change in temperatur e, ∆T, the fractional change in length, ∆l/l, is dir ectly proportional to ∆T. (10.4) where α1 is known as the coefficient of linear expansion (or linear expansivity) and is characteristic of the material of the rod. In Table 10.1, typical average values of the coefficient of linear expansion for some material in the temperature range 0  °C to 100 °C are given. From this Table, compare the value of αl for glass and copper . We find that copper expands about five times more than glass for the same rise in temperature. Normally, metals expand more and have relatively high values of αl.Table 10.1 Values of coefficient of linear expansion for some material Material α αα ααl (10–5 K–1) Aluminium 2.5 Brass 1.8 Iron 1.2 Copper 1

.Table 10.1 Values of coefficient of linear expansion for some material Material α αα ααl (10–5 K–1) Aluminium 2.5 Brass 1.8 Iron 1.2 Copper 1.7 Silver 1.9 Gold 1.4 Glass (pyrex) 0.32 Lead 0.29 Similarly, we consider the fractional change in volume, ∆V V, of a substance for temperatur e change ∆T and define the coefficient of volume expansion (or volume expansivity) ,   as (10.5) Here αV is also a characteristic of the substance but is not strictly a constant. It depends in general on temperature (Fig 10.6). It is seen that αV becomes constant only at a high temperature. Fig. 10.6 Coefficient of volume expansion of copper as a function of temperatur e. Table 10.2 gives the values of coefficient of volume expansion of some common substances in the temperatur e range 0–100 °C

.6 Coefficient of volume expansion of copper as a function of temperatur e. Table 10.2 gives the values of coefficient of volume expansion of some common substances in the temperatur e range 0–100 °C. You can see that thermal expansion of these substances (solids and liquids) is rather small, with  material,lla T l∆= ∆ l2Aa T A∆= ∆l3Va T V∆= ∆ (a) Linear expansion (b) Area expansion (c) Volume expansion 2024-25  206 PHYSICS like pyrex glass and invar (a special iron-nickel alloy) having particularly low values of αV. From this Table we find that the value of αv for alcohol (ethanol) is more than mercury and expands more than mercury for the same rise in temperature. Table 10.2 Values of coefficient of volume expansion for some substances Material α αα ααv ( K–1) Aluminium 7 × 10–5 Brass 6 × 10–5 Iron 3.55 × 10–5 Paraffin 58.8 × 10–5 Glass (ordinary) 2.5 × 10–5 Glass (pyrex) 1 × 10–5 Hard rubber 2.4 × 10–4 Invar 2 × 10–6 Mercury 18.2 × 10–5 Water 20

.55 × 10–5 Paraffin 58.8 × 10–5 Glass (ordinary) 2.5 × 10–5 Glass (pyrex) 1 × 10–5 Hard rubber 2.4 × 10–4 Invar 2 × 10–6 Mercury 18.2 × 10–5 Water 20.7 × 10–5 Alcohol (ethanol) 110 × 10–5 Water exhibits an anomalous behaviour; it contracts on heating between 0  °C and 4  °C. The volume of a given amount of water decreases as it is cooled from room temperature, until its temperature reaches 4 °C, [Fig. 10.7(a)]. Below 4 °C, the volume increases, and therefore, the density decreases [Fig. 10.7(b)]. This means that water has the maximum density at 4 °C. This property has an important envir onmental ef fect: bodies of water , such aslakes and ponds, freeze at the top first. As a lake cools toward 4  °C, water near the surface loses energy to the atmospher e, becomes denser , and sinks; the war mer, less dense water near the bottom rises. However , once the colder water on top reaches temperature below 4  °C, it becomes less dense and remains at the surface, where it freezes

. However , once the colder water on top reaches temperature below 4  °C, it becomes less dense and remains at the surface, where it freezes. If water did not have this property, lakes and ponds would freeze from the bottom up, which would destroy much of their animal and plant life. Gases, at ordinary temperature, expand more than solids and liquids. For liquids, the coefficient of volume expansion is r elatively independent of the temperatur e. However , for gases it is dependent on temperatur e. For an ideal gas, the coef ficient of volume expansion at constant pr essur e can be found fr om the ideal gas equation: PV = µRT At constant pr essur e P∆V = µR ∆T ∆ ∆V VT T= i.e., αvT=1 for ideal gas (10.6) At 0  °C, αv = 3.7  × 10–3 K–1, which is much larger than that for solids and liquids. Equation (10.6) shows the temp erature dependence of  αv; it decreases with increasing temperature

.6) At 0  °C, αv = 3.7  × 10–3 K–1, which is much larger than that for solids and liquids. Equation (10.6) shows the temp erature dependence of  αv; it decreases with increasing temperature. For a gas at room temperature and constant pressure, αv is about 3300  × 10–6 K–1, as Temperature (°C) Temperature (°C) (a) (b) Fig. 10.7 Thermal expansion of water . 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 207⊳⊳much as order(s) of magnitude larger than the coefficient of volume expansion of typical liquids. There is a simple relation between the coefficient of volume expansion ( αv) and coefficient of linear expansion ( αl). Imagine a cube of length, l, that expands equally in all directions, when its temperatur e incr eases by ∆T. We have ∆l = αl l ∆T so, ∆V = (l+∆l)3 – l3 ≃ 3l2 ∆l (10.7) In Equation (10.7), terms in ( ∆l)2 and (∆l)3 have been neglected since ∆l is small compar ed to l. So ∆∆∆ VV l lV Tl = =33α (10.8) which gives αv = 3αl(10

.7) In Equation (10.7), terms in ( ∆l)2 and (∆l)3 have been neglected since ∆l is small compar ed to l. So ∆∆∆ VV l lV Tl = =33α (10.8) which gives αv = 3αl(10.9) What happens by preventing the thermal expansion of a r od by fixing its ends rigidly? Clearly, the r od acquires a compr essive strain due to the exter nal forces provided by the rigid support at the ends. The corr esponding str ess set up in the r od is called thermal stress . For example, consider a steel rail of length 5 m and area of cross-section 40 cm2 that is prevented from expanding while the temperature rises by 10 °C. The coefficient of linear expansion of steel is αl(steel) = 1.2  × 10–5  K–1. Thus, the compressive strain is ∆l l= αl(steel) ∆T = 1.2  × 10–5 × 10=1.2  × 10–4. Youngs modulus of steel is Y (steel) = 2 × 1011 N m–2. Therefore, the thermal stress developed is ∆ ∆F AYl lsteel=  =2.4 × 107 N m–2, which corresponds to an exter nal for ce of ∆F = AYsteel ∆l l   =  2.4  × 107 × 40 × 10–4 j 105N

. Therefore, the thermal stress developed is ∆ ∆F AYl lsteel=  =2.4 × 107 N m–2, which corresponds to an exter nal for ce of ∆F = AYsteel ∆l l   =  2.4  × 107 × 40 × 10–4 j 105N. If two such steel rails, fixed at their outer ends, are in contact at their inner ends, a for ce of this magnitude can easily bend the rails. Example 10.1  Show that the coefficient of area expansion, ( ∆A/A)/∆T, of a rectangular sheet of the solid is twice its linear expansivity, αl.Answer Fig. 10.8 Consider a r ectangular sheet of the solid material of length a and breadth b (Fig. 10.8 ). When the temperatur e incr eases by ∆T, a increases by  ∆a = αl a∆T and b increases by ∆b = αlb ∆T. From Fig. 10.8,  the increase in area ∆A = ∆A1 +∆A2 + ∆A3 ∆A=a ∆b + b ∆a + (∆a)  (∆b) =a αlb ∆T + b αl a ∆T + (αl)2 ab (∆T)2 =αl ab ∆T (2 + αl ∆T) = αl A ∆T (2 + αl ∆T) Since αl ≃ 10–5 K–1, from Table 10.1, the product αl ∆T for fractional temperatur e is small in comparision with 2 and may be neglected. Hence, ⊳ Example 10

.1, the product αl ∆T for fractional temperatur e is small in comparision with 2 and may be neglected. Hence, ⊳ Example 10.2  A blacksmith fixes iron ring on the rim of the wooden wheel of a horse cart. The diameter of the rim and the iron ring are 5.243 m and 5.231 m, respectively at 27  °C. To what temperature should the ring be heated so as to fit the rim of the wheel? Answer Given, T1 = 27 °C LT1 = 5.231 m LT2 = 5.243 m So, LT2 =LT1 [1+αl (T2–T1)] 5.243 m = 5.231 m [1 + 1.20×10–5  K–1 (T2–27 °C)] or T2 = 218 °C.⊳∆A3 = (∆a) (∆b) ∆Al = a (∆b) ∆A2 = b (∆a)ab∆b ∆a 2024-25  208 PHYSICS 10.6  SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY Take some water in a vessel and start heating it on a bur ner. Soon you will notice that bubbles begin to move upward. As the temperature is raised the motion of water particles increases till it becomes turbulent as water starts boiling

. Soon you will notice that bubbles begin to move upward. As the temperature is raised the motion of water particles increases till it becomes turbulent as water starts boiling. What are the factors on which the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of a substance depend? In order to answer this question in the first step, heat a given quantity of water to raise its temperature by, say 20 °C and note the time taken. Again take the same amount of water and raise its temperature by 40 °C using the same source of heat. Note the time taken by using a stopwatch. Y ou will find it takes about twice the time and therefore, double the quantity of heat required raising twice the temperature of same amount of water . In the second step, now suppose you take double the amount of water and heat it, using the same heating arrangement, to raise the temperature by 20  °C, you will find the time taken is again twice that required in the first step

. In the thir d step, in place of water , now heat the same quantity of some oil, say mustard oil, and raise the temperature again by 20  °C. Now note the time by the same stopwatch. Y ou will find the time taken will be shorter and therefore, the quantity of heat required would be less than that required by the same amount of water for the same rise in temperature. The above observations show that the quantity of heat r equir ed to war m a given substance depends on its mass, m, the change in temperatur e, ∆T and the natur e of substance. The change in temperatur e of a substance , when a given quantity of heat is absorbed or r ejected by it, is characterised by a quantity called the heat capacity  of that substance. W e define heat capacity, S of a substance as QST∆=∆(10.10) where ∆Q is the amount of heat supplied to the substance to change its temperatur e from T to T + ∆T

. W e define heat capacity, S of a substance as QST∆=∆(10.10) where ∆Q is the amount of heat supplied to the substance to change its temperatur e from T to T + ∆T. You have observed that if equal amount of heat is added to equal masses of dif ferent substances, the r esulting temperatur e changes will not be the same. It implies that every substance has a unique value for the amount ofheat absorbed or given off to change the temperature of unit mass of it by one unit. This quantity is referred to as the specific heat capacity  of the substance. If ∆Q stands for the amount of heat absorbed or given off by a substance of mass m when it undergoes a temperature change ∆T, then the specific heat capacity, of that substance is given by 1S Qsm m T∆= =∆(10.11) The specific heat capacity  is the property of the substance which determines the change in the temperature of the substance (undergoing no phase change) when a given quantity of heat is absorbed (or given off) by it

. It is defined as the amount of heat per unit mass absorbed or given off by the substance to change its temperature by one unit. It depends on the nature of the substance and its temperature. The SI unit of specific heat capacity is J kg–1 K–1. If the amount of substance is specified in terms of moles µ, instead of mass m in kg, we can define heat capacity per mole of the substance by (10.12) where C is known as molar specific heat capacity  of the substance. Like S, C also depends on the natur e of the substance and its temperature. The SI unit of molar specific heat capacity is J mol–1 K–1. However , in connection with specific heat capacity of gases, additional conditions may be needed to define C. In this case, heat transfer can be achieved by keeping either pr essur e or volume constant. If the gas is held under constant pr essur e during the heat transfer , then it is called the molar specific heat capacity at constant pressure  and is denoted by Cp

. If the gas is held under constant pr essur e during the heat transfer , then it is called the molar specific heat capacity at constant pressure  and is denoted by Cp. On the other hand, if the volume of the gas is maintained during the heat transfer , then the corresponding molar specific heat capacity is called molar specific heat capacity at constant volume  and is denoted by Cv. For details see Chapter 11. Table 10.3 lists measured specific heat capacity of some substances at atmospheric pressure and ordinary temperature while Table 10.4 lists molar specific heat capacities of some gases. From Table 10.3 you can note that water 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 209⊳has the highest specific heat capacity compared to other substances. For this reason water is also used as a coolant in automobile radiators, as well as, a heater in hot water bags. Owing to its high specific heat capacity, water warms up more slowly than land during summer , and consequently wind from the sea has a cooling effect

. Owing to its high specific heat capacity, water warms up more slowly than land during summer , and consequently wind from the sea has a cooling effect. Now, you can tell why in desert ar eas, the earth sur face war ms up quickly during the day and cools quickly at night. Table 10.4 Molar specific heat capacities of some gases Gas Cp (J mol–1K–1) Cv(J mol–1K–1) He 20.8 12.5 H228.8 20.4 N229.1 20.8 O229.4 21.1 CO237.0 28.5 10.7  CALORIMETRY A system is said to be isolated if no exchange or transfer of heat occurs between the system and its surr oundings. When dif ferent parts of an isolated system ar e at dif ferent temperature, a quantity of heat transfers fr om the part at higher temperature to the part at lower temperatur e. The heat lost by the part at higher temperatur e is equal to the heat gained by the part at lower temperatur e. Calorimetry means measur ement of heat

. The heat lost by the part at higher temperatur e is equal to the heat gained by the part at lower temperatur e. Calorimetry means measur ement of heat. When a body at higher temperatur e is br ought in contact with another body at lower temperature, the heat lost by the hot body isequal to the heat gained by the colder body, provided no heat is allowed to escape to the surroundings. A device in which heat measurement can be done is called a calorimeter . It consists of a metallic vessel and stirrer of the same material, like copper or aluminium. The vessel is kept inside a wooden jacket, which contains heat insulating material, like glass wool etc. The outer jacket acts as a heat shield and reduces the heat loss from the inner vessel. There is an opening in the outer jacket through which a mercury thermometer can be inserted into the calorimeter (Fig. 10.20)

. There is an opening in the outer jacket through which a mercury thermometer can be inserted into the calorimeter (Fig. 10.20). The following example provides a method by which the specific heat capacity of a given solid can be determinated by using the principle, heat gained is equal to the heat lost. Example 10.3  A sphere of 0.047 kg aluminium is placed for sufficient time in a vessel containing boiling water , so that the sphere is at 100 °C. It is then immediately transfer ed to 0.14 kg copper calorimeter containing 0.25 kg water at 20  °C. The temperature of water rises and attains a steady state at 23 °C. Calculate the specific heat capacity of aluminium. Answer   In solving this example, we shall use the fact that at a steady  state, heat given by an aluminium sphere will be equal to the heat absorbed by the water and calorimeter . Mass of aluminium sphere ( m1) = 0

. Mass of aluminium sphere ( m1) = 0.047 kg Initial temperature  of aluminium  spher e = 100 °C Final temperature = 23 °C Change in temperature  (∆T)=(100 °C-23 °C)= 77 °C Let specific heat capacity of aluminium be sAl.Table 10.3 Specific heat capacity of some substances at room temperature and atmospheric pressure Substance Specific heat capacity Substance Specific heat capacity  (J kg–1 K–1) (J kg–1 K–1) Aluminium 900.0 Ice 2060 Carbon 506.5 Glass 840 Copper 386.4 Iron 450 Lead 127.7 Kerosene 2118 Silver 236.1 Edible oil 1965 Tungesten 134.4 Mercury 140 Water 4186.0 2024-25  210 PHYSICS The amount of heat lost by the aluminium sphere =  ∆ = × × °1 0.047kg 77 CAl Al m s T s Mass of water (m2) = 0.25 kg Mass of calorimeter ( m3) = 0.14 kg Initial temperature of water and calorimete r=20 °C Final temperature  of the mixture = 23 °C Change in temperature  (∆T2) = 23 °C – 20 °C = 3 °C Specific heat capacity of water ( sw) = 4.18 × 103 J kg–1  K–1 Specific heat capacity of copper calorimeter = 0

.18 × 103 J kg–1  K–1 Specific heat capacity of copper calorimeter = 0.386  × 103 J kg–1  K–1 The amount of heat gained by water and calorimeter = m2 sw ∆T2 + m3scu∆T2 = (m2sw + m3scu) (∆T2) = (0.25 kg  × 4.18  × 103 J kg–1  K–1 + 0.14 kg  × 0.386  × 103 J kg–1  K–1) (23 °C – 20  °C) In the steady state heat lost by the aluminium sphere = heat gained by water + heat gained by calorimeter . So, 0.047 kg  × sAl × 77 °C = (0.25 kg × 4.18  × 103 J kg–1  K–1+ 0.14 kg  × 0.386  × 103 J kg–1  K–1)(3 °C) sAl = 0.911 kJ k g–1 K–1⊳ 10.8  CHANGE OF STATE Matter normally exists in three states: solid, liquid and gas. A transition from one of these states to another is called a change of state. Two common changes of states ar e solid to liquid and liquid to gas (and, vice versa). These changes can occur when the exchange of heat takes place between the substance and its surr oundings. To study the change of state on heating or cooling, let us per form the following activity. Take some cubes of ice in a beaker

. To study the change of state on heating or cooling, let us per form the following activity. Take some cubes of ice in a beaker . Note the temperature of ice. Start heating it slowly on a constant heat source. Note the temperature after every  minute.  Continuously stir the mixture of water and ice. Draw a graph between temperatur e and time (Fig. 10.9). Y ou will observe no change in the temperature as long as there is ice in the beaker . In the above pr ocess, the temperature of the system does not change even though heat is being continuously supplied. The heat supplied  is being utilised in changing the state from solid (ice) to liquid (water).Fig. 10.9 A plot of temperature versus time showing the changes in the state of ice on heating (not to scale). The change of state from solid to liquid is called melting  or fusion and from liquid to solid is called freezing . It is observed that the temperature remains constant until the entire amount of the solid substance melts

. It is observed that the temperature remains constant until the entire amount of the solid substance melts. That is, both the solid and the liquid states of the substance coexist in thermal equilibrium during the change of states from solid to liquid.  The temperature at which the solid and the liquid states of the substance is in thermal equilibrium with each other is called its melting point . It is characteristic of the substance. It also depends on pressure. The melting point of a substance at standard atomspheric pressure is called its normal melting point . Let us do the following activity to understand the process of melting of ice. Take a slab of ice. T ake a metallic wir e and fix two blocks, say 5 kg each, at its ends. Put the wire over the slab as shown in Fig. 10.10. You will observe that the wir e passes thr ough the ice slab. This happens due to the fact that just below the wir e, ice melts at lower temperature due to incr ease in pr essur e

. 10.10. You will observe that the wir e passes thr ough the ice slab. This happens due to the fact that just below the wir e, ice melts at lower temperature due to incr ease in pr essur e. When the wir e has passed, water above the wir e freezes again. Thus, the wire passes through the slab and the slab does not split. This phenomenon of refreezing is called regelation . Skating is possible on snow due to the formation of water under the skates. W ater is for med due to the increase of pressure and it acts as a lubricant. 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 211 Fig. 10.10 After the whole of ice gets converted into water and as we continue further heating, we shall see that temperature begins to rise (Fig.10.9). The temperature keeps on rising till it reaches nearly100 °C when it again becomes steady. The heat supplied is now being utilised to change water from liquid state to vapour or  gaseous state. The change of state from liquid to vapour (or gas) is called vaporisation

. The heat supplied is now being utilised to change water from liquid state to vapour or  gaseous state. The change of state from liquid to vapour (or gas) is called vaporisation . It is observed that the temperatur e remains constant until the entire amount of the liquid is converted into vapour . That is, both the liquid and vapour states of the substance coexist in ther mal equilibrium, during the change of state fr om liquid to vapour . The temperatur e at which the liquid and the vapour states of the substance coexist is called its boiling point . Let us do the following activity to understand the pr ocess of boiling of water . Take a r ound-bottom flask, mor e than half filled with water . Keep it over a bur ner and fix a Triple Point The temperatur e of a substance r emains constant during its change of state (phase change). A graph between the temperatur e T and the Pr essur e P of the substance is called a phase diagram or P – T diagram. The following figur e shows the phase diagram of water and CO2

. A graph between the temperatur e T and the Pr essur e P of the substance is called a phase diagram or P – T diagram. The following figur e shows the phase diagram of water and CO2. Such a phase diagram divides the P – T plane into a solid-r egion, the vapour -region and the liquid-r egion. The r egions ar e separated by the curves such as sublimation curve (BO), fusion curve (AO) and vaporisation curve  (CO). The points on sublimation curve  represent states in which solid and vapour phases coexist. The point on the sublimation curve BO r epresent states in which the solid and vapour phases co-exist. Points on the fusion curve AO r epresent states in which solid and liquid phase coexist. Points on the vapourisation curve CO r epresent states in which the liquid and vapour phases coexist. The temperatur e and pr essur e at which the fusion curve, the vaporisation curve and the sublimation curve meet and all the thr ee phases of  a substance coexist is called the triple point  of the substance

. For example the triple point of water is represented by the temperature 273.16 K and pressure 6.1 1×10–3 Pa. (a) (b) Figure :   Pressure-temperature phase diagrams for (a) water and (b) CO2 (not to the scale). 2024-25  212 PHYSICS thermometer and steam outlet through the cork of the flask (Fig. 10.11). As water gets heated in the flask, note first that the air , which was dissolved in the water , will come out as small bubbles. Later , bubbles of steam will for m at the bottom but as they rise to the cooler water near the top, they condense and disappear . Finally, as the temperatur e of the entir e mass of the water reaches 100  °C, bubbles of steam reach the sur face and boiling is said to occur . The steam in the flask may not be visible but as it comes out of the flask, it condenses as tiny droplets of water , giving a foggy appearance. Fig. 10.11  Boiling process. If now the steam outlet is closed for a few seconds to incr ease the pr essur e in the flask, you will notice that boiling stops

. Fig. 10.11  Boiling process. If now the steam outlet is closed for a few seconds to incr ease the pr essur e in the flask, you will notice that boiling stops. Mor e heat would be r equired to raise the temperatur e (depending on the incr ease in pressur e) before boiling begins again. Thus boiling point incr eases with increase in pr essur e. Let us now remove the bur ner. Allow water to cool to about 80  °C. Remove the thermometer and steam outlet. Close the flask with the airtightcork. Keep the flask turned upside down on the stand. Pour ice-cold water on the flask. W ater vapours in the flask condense r educing the pressur e on the water sur face inside the flask. Water begins to boil again, now at a lower temperature. Thus boiling point decr eases with decrease in pr essur e. This explains why cooking is difficult on hills. At high altitudes, atmospheric pr essur e is lower , reducing the boiling point of water as compar ed to that at sea level

. This explains why cooking is difficult on hills. At high altitudes, atmospheric pr essur e is lower , reducing the boiling point of water as compar ed to that at sea level. On the other hand, boiling point is incr eased inside a pr essur e cooker by increasing the pr essur e. Hence cooking is faster . The boiling point of a substance at standar d atmospheric pr essur e is called its normal boiling point. However , all substances do not pass thr ough the thr ee states: solid-liquid-gas. Ther e are certain substances which nor mally pass fr om the solid to the vapour state dir ectly and vice versa. The change fr om solid state to vapour state without passing thr ough the liquid state is called sublimation , and the substance is said to sublime. Dry ice (solid CO2) sublimes, so also iodine. During the sublimation pr ocess both the solid and vapour states of a substance coexist in thermal equilibrium. 10.8.1  Latent Heat In Section 10

. Dry ice (solid CO2) sublimes, so also iodine. During the sublimation pr ocess both the solid and vapour states of a substance coexist in thermal equilibrium. 10.8.1  Latent Heat In Section 10.8, we have learnt that certain amount of heat ener gy is transferred between a substance and its surr oundings when it under goes a change of state. The amount of heat per unit mass transferr ed during change of state of the substance is called latent heat of the substance for the pr ocess. For example, if heat is added to a given quantity of ice at –10  °C, the temperature of ice incr eases until it r eaches its melting point (0  °C). At this temperature, the addition of mor e heat does not incr ease the temperatur e but causes the ice to melt, or changes its state. Once the entir e ice melts, adding mor e heat will cause the temperatur e of the water to rise. A similar situation occurs during liquid gas change of state at the boiling point

. Once the entir e ice melts, adding mor e heat will cause the temperatur e of the water to rise. A similar situation occurs during liquid gas change of state at the boiling point. Adding mor e heat to boiling water causes vaporisation, without increase in temperature. 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 213⊳The heat required during a change of state depends upon the heat of transformation and the mass of the substance under going a change of state. Thus, if mass m of a substance under goes a change fr om one state to the other , then the quantity of heat r equir ed is given by Q = m L orL = Q/m (10.13) where L is known as latent heat and is a characteristic of the substance. Its SI unit is J kg–1. The value of L also depends on the pressur e. Its value is usually quoted at standar d atmospheric pr essur e. The latent heat for a solid- liquid state change is called the latent heat of fusion  (Lf), and that for a liquid-gas state change is called the latent heat of vaporisation  (Lv)

. The latent heat for a solid- liquid state change is called the latent heat of fusion  (Lf), and that for a liquid-gas state change is called the latent heat of vaporisation  (Lv). These ar e often r eferred to as the heat of fusion and the heat of vaporisation. A plot of temperature versus heat  for a quantity of water is shown in Fig. 10.12. The latent heats of some substances, their freezing and boiling points, are given in Table 10.5. Fig. 10.12 Temperature versus heat for water at 1 atm pr essur e (not to scale).Note that when heat is added (or removed) during a change of state, the temperature remains constant. Note in Fig. 10.12 that the slopes of the phase lines ar e not all the same, which indicate that specific heats of the various states ar e not equal. For water , the latent heat of fusion and vapori sation are Lf = 3.33  × 105 J kg–1 and Lv = 22.6 × 105 J kg–1, respectively. That is, 3.33  × 105 J of heat is needed to melt 1 kg ice at 0 °C, and 22

.33  × 105 J kg–1 and Lv = 22.6 × 105 J kg–1, respectively. That is, 3.33  × 105 J of heat is needed to melt 1 kg ice at 0 °C, and 22.6  × 105 J of heat is needed to convert 1 kg  water into steam at 100 °C. So, steam at 100 °C carries  22.6  × 105 J  kg–1 more heat than water at 100 °C. This is why burns from steam are usually more serious than those from boiling water . Example 10.4  When 0.15 kg of ice at 0  °C is mixed with 0.30 kg of water at 50 °C in a container , the r esulting temperatur e is 6.7 °C. Calculate the heat of fusion of ice. (swater = 4186 J kg–1 K–1) Answer Heat lost by water = msw (θf–θi)w = (0.30 k g) (4186 J kg–1 K–1) (50.0  °C – 6.7  °C) = 54376.14 J Heat r equir ed to melt ice = m2Lf = (0.15 k g) Lf Heat r equir ed to raise temperatur e of ice water to final temperatur e = mIsw (θf–θi)I = (0.15 kg) (4186 J kg–1 K–1) (6.7  °C – 0 °C) = 4206.93 J Heat lost = heat gained 54376.14 J = (0.15 k g) Lf + 4206.93 J Lf = 3.34×105 J kg–1. ⊳Table 10

.15 kg) (4186 J kg–1 K–1) (6.7  °C – 0 °C) = 4206.93 J Heat lost = heat gained 54376.14 J = (0.15 k g) Lf + 4206.93 J Lf = 3.34×105 J kg–1. ⊳Table 10.5 Temperatures of the change of state and latent heats for various substances at 1 atm pressure Substance Melting LfBoiling Lv Point (°C) (105J kg–1) Point (°C) (105J kg–1) Ethanol –114 1.0 78 8.5 Gold 1063 0.645 2660 15.8 Lead 328 0.25 1744 8.67 Mercury –39 0.12 357 2.7 Nitrogen –210 0.26 –196 2.0 Oxygen –219 0.14 –183 2.1 Water 0 3.33 100 22.6 2024-25  214 PHYSICS⊳Example 10.5  Calculate the heat required to convert 3 kg of ice at –12  °C kept in a calorimeter to steam at 100 °C at atmospheric pressure. Given specific heat capacity of ice = 2100 J kg–1 K–1, specific heat capacity of water = 4186 J kg– 1 K–1, latent heat of fusion of ice = 3.35  × 105 J kg–1 and latent heat of steam = 2.256  ×106 J kg–1

.35  × 105 J kg–1 and latent heat of steam = 2.256  ×106 J kg–1. Answer  We have Mass of the ice, m = 3 kg specific heat capa city of ice, sice = 2100 J kg–1  K–1 specific heat capacity of water , swater = 4186 J kg–1  K–1 latent heat of fusion of ice, Lf ice = 3.35  × 105 J kg–1 latent heat of steam, Lsteam = 2.256  × 106 J kg–1 Now,Q=heat r equir ed to convert 3 kg of ice at –12  °C to steam at 100 °C, Q1=heat r equir ed to convert ice at –12 °C to ice at 0  °C. =m sice ∆T1 = (3 kg) (2100 J kg–1. K–1) [0–(–12)] °C = 75600 J Q2=heat r equir ed to melt ice at 0 °C to water at 0  °C =m Lf ice = (3 kg) (3.35  × 105 J kg–1) = 1005000 J Q3=heat r equir ed to convert water at 0 °C to water at 100  °C. =msw ∆T2 = (3kg) (4186J kg–1 K–1) (100  °C) =1255800 J Q4=heat r equir ed to convert water at 100  °C to steam at 100  °C. =m Lsteam = (3 kg) (2.256 × 106 J kg–1) = 6768000 J So, Q=Q1 + Q2 + Q3 + Q4 =75600J + 1005000 J + 1255800 J + 6768000 J =9.1×106 J ⊳ 10

. =m Lsteam = (3 kg) (2.256 × 106 J kg–1) = 6768000 J So, Q=Q1 + Q2 + Q3 + Q4 =75600J + 1005000 J + 1255800 J + 6768000 J =9.1×106 J ⊳ 10.9  HEAT TRANSFER We have seen that heat is ener gy transfer from one system to another or from one part of a system to another part, arising due totemperature difference. What are the different ways by which this energy transfer takes place? There are three distinct modes of heat transfer: conduction, convection and radiation (Fig. 10.13). Fig. 10.13 Heating by conduction, convection and radiation. 10.9.1  Conduction Conduction is the mechanism of transfer of heat between two adjacent parts of a body because of their temperature difference. Suppose, one end of a metallic r od is put in a flame, the other end of the r od will soon be so hot that you cannot hold it by your bare hands. Here, heat transfer takes place by conduction fr om the hot end of the rod thr ough its dif ferent parts to the other end

. Here, heat transfer takes place by conduction fr om the hot end of the rod thr ough its dif ferent parts to the other end.  Gases are poor thermal conductors, while liquids have conductivities inter mediate between solids and gases. Heat conduction may be described quantitatively as the time rate of heat flow in a material for a given temperatur e difference. Consider a metallic bar of length L and uniform cross -section A with its two ends maintained at different temperatures. This can be done, for example, by putting the ends in ther mal contact with large reservoirs at temperatures , say, TC and TD, respectively (Fig. 1 0.14). Let us assume the ideal condition that the sides of the bar ar e fully insulated so that no heat is exchanged between the sides and the surr ounding s. After sometime, a steady state is reached; the temperatur e of the bar decr eases unifor mly with distance fr om TC to TD; (TC>TD)

. After sometime, a steady state is reached; the temperatur e of the bar decr eases unifor mly with distance fr om TC to TD; (TC>TD). The r eservoir at C supplies heat at a constant rate, which transfers through the bar and is given out at the same rate to the reservoir at D. It is found 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 215⊳experimentally that in this steady state, the rate of flow of heat (or heat current) H is proportional to the temperature difference ( TC – TD) and the area of cross-section A and is inversely proportional to the length L : H = KA –C DT T L(10.14) The constant of proportionality K is called the thermal conductivity  of the material. The greater the value of K for a material, the mor e rapidly will it conduct heat. The SI unit of K is J s–1 m–1 K–1 or W m–1 K–1. The thermal conductivities of various substances ar e listed in Table 10.6. These values vary slightly with temperatur e, but can be consider ed to be constant over a nor mal temperatur e range

. The thermal conductivities of various substances ar e listed in Table 10.6. These values vary slightly with temperatur e, but can be consider ed to be constant over a nor mal temperatur e range. Compar e the r elatively lar ge ther mal conductivities of  good thermal conductors and, metals, with the relatively small thermal conductivities of some good ther mal insulators, such as wood and glass wool. Y ou may have noticed that some cooking pots have copper coating on the bottom. Being a good conductor of heat, copper pr omotes the distribution of heat over the bottom of a pot for unifor m cooking. Plastic foams, on the other hand, ar e good insulators, mainly because they contain pockets of air . Recall that gases ar e poor conductors, and note the low ther mal conductivity of air in the Table 10.5. Heat retention and transfer are important in many other applications

. Recall that gases ar e poor conductors, and note the low ther mal conductivity of air in the Table 10.5. Heat retention and transfer are important in many other applications. Houses made of concr ete r oofs get very hot during summer days because thermal conductivity of concr ete (though much smaller than that of a metal) is still not small enough. Therefore, people, usually, prefer to give a layer of earth or foam insulation on the ceiling so that heat transfer isprohibited and keeps the r oom cooler . In some situations, heat transfer is critical. In a nuclear reactor , for example, elaborate heat transfer systems need to be installed so that the enormous ener gy pr oduced by nuclear fission in the cor e transits out suf ficiently fast, thus preventing the cor e from over heating. Table 10.6 Thermal conductivities of some       material Material Thermal conductivity (J s–1 m–1 K–1 ) Metals Silver 406 Copper 385 Aluminium 205 Brass 109 Steel 50.2 Lead 34.7 Mercury 8.3 Non-metals Insulating brick 0

.2 Lead 34.7 Mercury 8.3 Non-metals Insulating brick 0.15 Concr ete 0.8 Body fat 0.20 Felt 0.04 Glass 0.8 Ice 1.6 Glass wool 0.04 Wood 0.12 Water 0.8 Gases Air 0.024 Argon 0.016 Hydrogen 0.14 Example 10.6  What is the temperature of the steel-copper junction in the steady state of the system shown in Fig. 10.15. Length of the steel r od = 15.0 cm, length of the copper r od = 10.0 cm, temperatur e of the furnace = 300  °C, temperature of the other end = 0  °C. The area of cross section of the steel rod is twice that of the copper rod. (Thermal conductivity of steel = 50.2 J s–1 m–1 K–1; and of copper = 385 J s–1m–1 K–1).Fig. 10.14 Steady state heat flow by conduction in a bar with its two ends maintained at temperatur es TC and TD; (TC > TD). 2024-25  216 PHYSICS⊳Fig. 10.15 Answer   The insulating material around the rods reduces heat loss from the sides of the rods. Therefore, heat flows only along the length of the rods. Consider any cr oss section of the r od

. 10.15 Answer   The insulating material around the rods reduces heat loss from the sides of the rods. Therefore, heat flows only along the length of the rods. Consider any cr oss section of the r od. In the steady state, heat flowing into the element must equal the heat flowing out of it; otherwise there would be a net gain or loss of heat by the element and its temperatur e would not be steady. Thus in the steady state, rate of heat flowing acr oss a cr oss section of the r od is the same at every point along the length of the combined steel-copper r od. Let T be the temperatur e of the steel-copper junction in the steady state. Then, ()()1 1 2 2 1 2300 0 K  A T K  A T –=  L L− wher e 1 and 2 r efer to the steel and copper r od respectively.  For A1 = 2 A2, L1 = 15.0 cm, L2 = 10.0 cm, K1 = 50.2 J s–1 m–1 K –1, K2 = 385 J s–1 m–1 K –1, we have ( ) 50.2  2 300 385 15 10T T= × − which gives T = 44.4  °C ⊳ Example 10.7  An iron bar ( L1 = 0.1 m, A1 = 0.02 m2, K1 = 79 W m–1 K–1) and a brass bar ( L2 = 0

.2  2 300 385 15 10T T= × − which gives T = 44.4  °C ⊳ Example 10.7  An iron bar ( L1 = 0.1 m, A1 = 0.02 m2, K1 = 79 W m–1 K–1) and a brass bar ( L2 = 0.1 m, A2 = 0.02 m2, K2 = 109 W m–1K–1) are solder ed end to end as shown in  Fig. 10.16.   The free ends of the ir on bar and brass bar ar e maintained at 373 K and 273 K r espectively. Obtain expressions for and hence compute (i) the temperatur e of the junction of the two bars, (ii) the equivalent ther mal conductivity of the compound bar , and (iii) the heat current thr ough the compound bar . Fig 10.16Answer Given, L1 = L2= L = 0.1 m, A1 = A2= A= 0.02 m2 K1 = 79 W m–1 K–1, K2 = 109 W m–1 K–1, T1 = 373 K, and T2 = 273 K. Under steady state condition, the heat current (H1) through ir on bar is equal to the heat curr ent (H2) through brass bar

. Under steady state condition, the heat current (H1) through ir on bar is equal to the heat curr ent (H2) through brass bar . So, H = H1 = H2   =  () 1 1 1 0 2 2 0 2 1 2– ( – ) K A T T K A T T L L= For A1 = A2 = A and L1 = L2 = L, this equation leads to K1 (T1 – T0) = K2 (T0 – T2) Thus, the junction temperature T0 of the two bars is T0 = ( ) ( )1 1 2 2 1 2K T K T K K+ + Using this equation, the heat curr ent H thr ough either bar is H =()1 1 0 2 0 2– ( – ) K A T T K A T T L L=     Using these equations, the heat curr ent H ′ through the compound bar of length L1 + L2 = 2L and the equivalent ther mal conductivity K′, of the compound bar ar e given by ()1 2– 2K A T TH HL′= =′ 1 2 1 22= ′+K KKK K (i) ( ) ( )1 1 2 2 0 1 2K T K TTK K+=+      ( )()( )()–1 –1 –1 –1 –1 –1 –1 –179 m K 373K 109 W m K 273K 79 W m K 109 W m KW + = + = 315 K (ii) 1 2 1 22   = K KKK K′+     = –1 –1 –1 –1 –1 –1 –1 –12×(79 W m K ) ×(109 W m K ) 79 W m K +109 W m K     = 91

.6 W m–1 K–1 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 217 (iii) ()1 2– 2K A T TH HL′= = ′  ( )()( ) ( )–1 –1 291.6 W m K × 0.02 m  × 373K–273K 2× 0.1 m=   = 916.1 W ⊳ 10.9.2  Convection Convection is a mode of heat transfer by actual motion of matter . It is  possible only in fluids. Convection can be natural or for ced. In natural convection, gravity plays an important part. When a fluid is heated fr om below, the hot part expands and, ther efore, becomes less dense. Because of buoyancy, it rises and the upper colder part r eplaces it. This again gets heated, rises up and is replaced by the relatively colder part of the fluid. The process goes on. This mode of heat transfer is evidently different from conduction. Convection involves bulk transport of different parts of the fluid.      In forced convection, material is forced to move by a pump or by some other physical means

. Convection involves bulk transport of different parts of the fluid.      In forced convection, material is forced to move by a pump or by some other physical means. The common  examples of forced convection systems are forced-air heating systems in home, the human circulatory system, and the cooling system of an automobile engine. In the human body, the heart acts as the pump that circulates blood through different parts of the body, transferring heat by forced convection and maintaining it at a uniform temperature. Natural convection is responsible for many familiar phenomena. During the day, the ground heats up more quickly than large bodiesof water do . This occurs both because water has a greater specific heat capacity and because mixing currents disperse the absorbed heat throughout the gr eat volume of water . The air in contact with the warm ground is heated by conduction. It expands, becoming less dense than the surr ounding cooler air

. The air in contact with the warm ground is heated by conduction. It expands, becoming less dense than the surr ounding cooler air . As a r esult, the warm air rises (air currents) and the other air moves (winds) to fill the space-creating a sea breeze near a lar ge body of water . Cooler air descends, and a thermal convection cycle is set up, which transfers heat away from the land. At night, the ground loses its heat more quickly, and the water surface is warmer than the land. As a result, the cycle is reveresed (Fig. 10.17). The other example of natural convection is the steady sur face wind on the earth blowing in from north-east towar ds the equator , the so-called trade wind. A resonable explanation is as follows: the equatorial and polar regions of the earth receive unequal solar heat. Air at the earth’s surface near the equator is hot, while the air in the upper atmospher e of the poles is cool

. Air at the earth’s surface near the equator is hot, while the air in the upper atmospher e of the poles is cool. In the absence of any other factor , a convection curr ent would be set up, with the air at the equatorial sur face rising and moving out towar ds the poles, descending and streaming in towar ds the equator . The r otation of the earth, however , modifies this convection current. Because of this, air close to the equator has an eastward speed of 1600 km/h, while it is zer o close to the poles. As a r esult, the air descends not at the poles but at 30° N (North) latitude and r eturns to the equator . This is called trade wind . Fig. 10.17 Convection cycles. 2024-25  218 PHYSICS 10.9.3  Radiation Conduction and convection require some material as a transport medium. These modes of heat transfer cannot operate between bodies separated by a distance in vacuum. But the earth does receive heat from the Sun across a huge distance

. These modes of heat transfer cannot operate between bodies separated by a distance in vacuum. But the earth does receive heat from the Sun across a huge distance. Similarly, we quickly feel the warmth of the fire nearby even though air conducts poorly and before convection takes some time to set in. The third mechanism for heat transfer needs no medium; it is called radiation and the energy so transferred by electromagnetic waves is called radiant energy. In an electromagnetic wave, electric and magnetic fields oscillate in space and time. Like any wave, electromagnetic waves can have different wavelengths and can travel in vacuum with the same speed, namely the speed of light i.e., 3 × 108 m s–1 . You will lear n these matters in more detail later , but you now know why heat transfer by radiation does not need any medium and why it is so fast. This is how heat is transferred to the earth from the Sun through empty space. All bodies emit radiant energy, whether they are solid, liquid or gas

. This is how heat is transferred to the earth from the Sun through empty space. All bodies emit radiant energy, whether they are solid, liquid or gas. The electromagnetic radiation emitted by a body by virtue of its temperature, like radiation by a red hot iron or light from a filament lamp is called thermal radiation. When this ther mal radiation falls on other bodies, it is partly r eflected and partly absorbed. The amount of heat that a body can absorb by radiation depends on the colour of the body. We find that black bodies absorb and emit radiant energy better than  bodies of lighter colours. This fact finds many applications in our daily life. W e wear white or light colour ed clothes in summer , so that they absorb the least heat from the Sun. However , during winter , we use dark coloured clothes , which absorb heat from the sun and keep our body warm. The bottoms of utensils for cooking food are blackened so that they absorb maximum heat from fire and transfer it to the vegetables to be cooked

. The bottoms of utensils for cooking food are blackened so that they absorb maximum heat from fire and transfer it to the vegetables to be cooked. Similarly, a Dewar flask or thermos bottle is a device to minimise heat transfer between the contents of the bottle and outside. It consists of a double-walled glass vessel with the inner and outer walls coated with silver . Radiation from the inner wall is reflected back to thecontents of the bottle. The outer wall similarly reflects back any incoming radiation. The space between the walls is evacuted to r educe conduction and convection losses and the flask is supported on an insulator , like cork. The device is, ther efore, useful for pr eventing hot contents (like, milk) from getting cold, or alternatively, to store cold contents (like, ice). 10.9.4 Blackbody Radiation We have so far not mentioned the wavelength content of thermal radiation

. 10.9.4 Blackbody Radiation We have so far not mentioned the wavelength content of thermal radiation. The important thing about thermal radiation at any temperature is that it is not of one (or a few) wavelength(s) but has a continuous spectrum from the small to the long wavelengths. The energy content of radiation, however , varies for different wavelengths. Figure 10.18 gives the experimental curves for radiation energy per unit area per unit wavelength emitted by a blackbody versus wavelength for different temperatures. Fig. 10.18:   Energy emitted versus wavelength for a blackbody at different temperatures Notice that the wavelength λm for which energy is the maximum decreases with increasing temperature. The relation between λm and T is given by what is known as Wien’s Displacement Law: λm T  =  constant (10.15) The value of the constant (Wien’s constant) is 2.9 × 10–3 m K

. The relation between λm and T is given by what is known as Wien’s Displacement Law: λm T  =  constant (10.15) The value of the constant (Wien’s constant) is 2.9 × 10–3 m K. This law explains why the colour of a piece of iron heated in a hot flame first becomes dull red, then reddish yellow, and finally white hot. Wien’s law is useful for estimating the surface temperatures of celestial 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 219 bodies like, the moon, Sun and other stars. Light from the moon is found to have a maximum intensity near the wavelength 14 µm. By Wien’s law, the surface of the moon is estimated to have a temperature of 200 K. Solar radiation has a maximum at λm = 4753 Å. This corresponds to T = 6060 K. Remember , this is the temperatur e of the sur face of the sun, not its interior . The most significant feature of the blackbody radiation curves in Fig. 10.18  is that they are universal . They depend only on the temperature and not on the size, shape or material of the blackbody

. The most significant feature of the blackbody radiation curves in Fig. 10.18  is that they are universal . They depend only on the temperature and not on the size, shape or material of the blackbody. Attempts to explain blackbody radiation theoretically, at the beginning of the twentieth century, spurred the quantum revolution in physics, as you will learn in later courses. Energy can be transferred by radiation over large distances, without a medium (i.e. , in vacuum). The total electromagnetic energy radiated by a body at absolute temperature T is proportional to its size, its ability to radiate (called emissivity)  and most importantly to its temperature. For a body , which is a perfect radiator , the ener gy emitted per unit time ( H) is given by H = AσT4(10.16) where A is the area and T is the absolute temperature of the body

. For a body , which is a perfect radiator , the ener gy emitted per unit time ( H) is given by H = AσT4(10.16) where A is the area and T is the absolute temperature of the body.  This relation obtained experimentally by Stefan and later proved theoretically by Boltzmann is known as Stefan- Boltzmann law  and the constant σ is called Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Its value in SI units is 5.67 × 10–8 W m–2 K–4. Most bodies emit only a fraction of the rate given by Eq. 10.16 . A substance like lamp black comes close to the limit. One, therefore, defines a dimensionless fraction e called emissivity  and writes, H = AeσT4(10.17) Here, e = 1 for a per fect radiator . For a tungsten lamp, for example, e is about 0.4. Thus , a tungsten lamp at a temperature of 3000 K and a surface area of 0.3 cm2 radiates at the rate  H = 0.3 × 10–4 × 0.4 × 5.67 × 10–8 × (3000)4 = 60 W . A body at temperature T, with surroundings at temperatures Ts, emits, as well as, receives energy

.3 cm2 radiates at the rate  H = 0.3 × 10–4 × 0.4 × 5.67 × 10–8 × (3000)4 = 60 W . A body at temperature T, with surroundings at temperatures Ts, emits, as well as, receives energy. For a per fect radiator , the net rate of loss of radiant energy is H = σA (T4 – Ts4)For a body with emissivity e, the relation modifies to H = eσ A (T4 – Ts4) (10.18) As an example, let us estimate the heat radiated by our bodies. Suppose the surface area of a person’s body is about 1.9 m2 and the room temperature is 22 °C. The internal body temperature, as we know, is about 37  °°C.  The skin temperature may be 28° °C (say). The emissivity of the skin is about 0.97 for the relevant region of electromagnetic radiation. The rate of heat loss is: H = 5.67 × 10–8 × 1.9 × 0.97 × {(301)4 – (295)4}  =66.4 W which is more than half the rate of energy production by the body at rest (120 W)

. The rate of heat loss is: H = 5.67 × 10–8 × 1.9 × 0.97 × {(301)4 – (295)4}  =66.4 W which is more than half the rate of energy production by the body at rest (120 W). To prevent this heat loss effectively (better than ordinary clothing), modern arctic clothing has an additional thin shiny metallic layer next to the skin, which reflects the body’s radiation. 10.10  NEWTON’S LAW OF COOLING We all know that hot water or milk when left on a table begins to cool, gradually. Ultimately it attains the temperature of the surroundings. To study how slow or fast a given body can cool on exchanging heat with its surroundings, let us perform the following activity. Take some water , say 300 mL, in a calorimeter with a stirrer and cover it with a two-holed lid. Fix the stirrer through one hole and fix a thermometer through another hole in the lid and make sure that the bulb of thermometer is immersed in the water . Note the r eading of the ther mometer . This r eading T1 is the temperature of the surroundings

. Note the r eading of the ther mometer . This r eading T1 is the temperature of the surroundings. Heat the water kept in the calorimeter till it attains a temperature, say 40  °C above room temperature (i.e., temperature of the surroundings). Then, stop heating the water by removing the heat source. Start the stop-watch and note the reading of the thermometer after a fixed interval of time, say after every one minute of stirring gently with the stirr er. Continue to note the temperatur e (T2) of water till it attains a temperature about 5 °C above that of the surroundings. Then, plot 2024-25  220 PHYSICS a graph by taking each value of temperature ∆T = T2 – T1 along y-axis and the coresponding value of  t along x-axis (Fig. 10.19). Fig. 10.19 Curve showing cooling of hot water with time. From the graph you can infer how the cooling of hot water depends on the difference of its temperatur e from that of the surr oundings

.19). Fig. 10.19 Curve showing cooling of hot water with time. From the graph you can infer how the cooling of hot water depends on the difference of its temperatur e from that of the surr oundings. Y ou will also notice that initially the rate of cooling is higher and decreases as the temperature of the body falls. The above activity shows that a hot body loses heat to its surroundings in the form of heat radiation. The rate of loss of heat depends on the difference in temperature between the body and its surroundings. Newton was the first to study, in a systematic manner , the r elation between the heat lost by a body in a given enclosure and its temperature. According to Newton’s law of cooling, the rate of loss of heat, – d Q/dt of the body is directly proportional to the difference of temperature ∆T = (T2–T1) of the body and the surr oundings. The law holds good only for small dif ference of temperatur e

. The law holds good only for small dif ference of temperatur e. Also, the loss of  heat by radiation depends upon the natur e of the sur face of the body and the ar ea of the exposed sur face. W e can write – (10.19) where k is a positive constant depending upon the ar ea and natur e of the sur face of the body. Suppose a body of mass m and specific heat capacity s is at temperatur e T2. Let T1 be the temperatur e of the surr oundings. If the temperature falls by a small amount dT2 in time dt, then the amount of heat lost is dQ = ms dT2 ∴ Rate of loss of heat is given by dQ dtmsdT dt=2(10.20)From Eqs. (10.15) and (10.16) we have – ( – ) m sdT dtk T T2 2 1= dT T Tk msdt K dt2 2 1–– –= =(10.21) where K = k/m s On integrating, loge (T2 – T1) = – K t + c (10.22) or T2 = T1 + C′ e–Kt; where C′ = ec(10.23) Equation (10.23) enables you to calculate the time of cooling of a body through a particular range of temperature

.22) or T2 = T1 + C′ e–Kt; where C′ = ec(10.23) Equation (10.23) enables you to calculate the time of cooling of a body through a particular range of temperature. For small temperature differences, the rate of cooling, due to conduction, convection, and radiation combined, is proportional to the difference in temperature. It is a valid approximation in the transfer of heat from a radiator to a room, the loss of heat through the wall of a room, or the cooling of a cup of tea on the table. Fig. 10.20  Verification of Newton’s Law of cooling. Newton’s law of cooling can be verified with the help of the experimental set-up shown in Fig. 10.20(a). The set-up consists of a double- walled vessel (V) containing water  between the two walls. A copper calorimeter (C) containing hot water is placed inside the double-walled vessel. Two thermometers through the corks are used to note the temperatures T2 of water in calorimeter and T1 of hot water in between the double walls, respectively

. Two thermometers through the corks are used to note the temperatures T2 of water in calorimeter and T1 of hot water in between the double walls, respectively. Temperature of hot water in the calorimeter is noted after equal intervals of time. A graph is plotted between lo ge (T2–T1) [or ln(T2–T1)] and time ( t). The nature of the∆ 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 221⊳graph is observed to be a straight line having a negative slope as shown in Fig. 10.20(b). This is in support of Eq. 10.22. Example 10.8   A pan filled with hot food cools from 94  °C to 86 °C in 2 minutes when the room temperature is at 20 °C. How long will it take to cool from 71 ° C to 69  °C? Answer  The average temperature of 94 °C and 86 °C is 90  °C, which is 70  °C above the room temperature. Under these conditions the pan cools 8 °C in 2 minutes. Using Eq. (10.21), we have Change in temperature TimeK T= ∆ SUMMARY 1

. Under these conditions the pan cools 8 °C in 2 minutes. Using Eq. (10.21), we have Change in temperature TimeK T= ∆ SUMMARY 1.Heat is a form of energy that flows between a body and its surrounding medium by virtue of temperatur e difference between them. The degr ee of hotness of the body is quantitatively r epresented by temperatur e. 2.A temperatur e-measuring device (ther mometer) makes use of some measurable pr operty (called ther mometric pr operty) that changes with temperatur e. Dif ferent ther mometers lead to dif ferent temperatur e scales. T o construct a temperatur e scale, two fixed points are chosen and assigned some arbitrary values of temperatur e. The two numbers fix the origin of the scale and the size of its unit. 3.The Celsius temperatur e (tC) and the Far enheit temperar e (tF)are related by tF = (9/5) tC + 32 4.The ideal gas equation connecting pressure ( P), volume ( V) and absolute temperature ( T) is : PV = µRT where µ is the number of moles and R is the universal gas constant. 5

.The ideal gas equation connecting pressure ( P), volume ( V) and absolute temperature ( T) is : PV = µRT where µ is the number of moles and R is the universal gas constant. 5.In the absolute temperature scale, the zero of the scale  corresponds to the temperature where every substance in nature has the least possible molecular activity. The Kelvin absolute temperature scale ( T ) has the same unit size as the Celsius scale ( Tc ), but differs in the origin : TC   =  T – 273.15 6.The coef ficient of linear expansion ( αl) and volume expansion ( αv) are defined by the relations : llTlα∆= ∆ VVTVα∆= ∆( )°°8 C= 70 C2 minK The average of 69 °C and 71  °C is 70  °C, which is 50 °C above room temperature. K is the same for this situation as for the original. °2 C Time = K (50 °C) When we divide above two equations, we have 8 C/2 min (70 C)=2 C/time (50 C)K K° ° ° ° Time = 0.7 min         = 42 s ⊳ 2024-25  222 PHYSICS where ∆l  and  ∆V denote the change in length l and volume V for a change of temperature ∆T

.7 min         = 42 s ⊳ 2024-25  222 PHYSICS where ∆l  and  ∆V denote the change in length l and volume V for a change of temperature ∆T.  The r elation between them is : αv  =  3 αl 7.The specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by smQ T=1∆ ∆ where m is the mass of the substance and ∆Q is the heat required to change its temperatur e by ∆T.  The molar specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by 1QCTµ∆=∆ wher e µ is the number  of moles of the substance. 8.The latent heat of fusion ( Lf) is the heat per unit mass r equir ed to change a substance from solid into liquid at the same temperatur e and pressur e. The latent heat of vaporisation ( Lv) is the heat per unit mass r equir ed to change a substance fr om liquid to the vapour state without change in the temperatur e and pr essur e. 9.The three modes of heat transfer are conduction, convection and radiation. 10.In conduction, heat is transferred between neighbouring parts of a body through molecular collisions, without any flow of matter

. 10.In conduction, heat is transferred between neighbouring parts of a body through molecular collisions, without any flow of matter .  For a bar of length L and unifor m cross section A with its ends maintained at temperatur es TC and TD, the rate of flow of heat H is :  C D T T H = K AL− wher e K is the ther mal conductivity of the material of the bar . 11.Newton’s Law of Cooling says that the rate of cooling of a body is proportional to the excess temperature of the body over the surroundings : 2 1d( )dQ = – k T  – T    t Where T1 is the temperature of the surrounding medium and T2 is the temperature of the body. 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 223 POINTS TO PONDER 1.The relation connecting Kelvin temperature ( T) and the Celsius temperature tc T  =  tc + 273.15 and the assignment T = 273.16 K for the triple point of water are exact relations (by choice)

.The relation connecting Kelvin temperature ( T) and the Celsius temperature tc T  =  tc + 273.15 and the assignment T = 273.16 K for the triple point of water are exact relations (by choice). W ith this choice, the Celsius temperatur e of the melting point of water and boiling point of water (both at 1 atm pr essur e) are very close to, but not exactly equal to 0  °C and 100 °C respectively.  In the original Celsius scale, these latter fixed points were exactly at 0  °C and 100  °C (by choice), but now the triple point of water is the preferred choice for the fixed point, because it has a unique temperatur e. 2.A liquid in equilibrium with vapour has the same pr essur e and temperatur e throughout the system; the two phases in equilibrium dif fer in their molar volume (i.e. density). This is true for a system with any number of phases in equilibrium. 3.Heat transfer always involves temperatur e difference between two systems or two parts of the same system

.e. density). This is true for a system with any number of phases in equilibrium. 3.Heat transfer always involves temperatur e difference between two systems or two parts of the same system. Any ener gy transfer that does not involve temperatur e difference in some way is not heat. 4.Convection involves flow of matter within a fluid  due to unequal temperatur es of its parts. A hot bar placed under a running tap loses heat by conduction between the surface of the bar and water and not by convection within water . EXERCISES 10.1 The triple points of neon and carbon dioxide are 24.57 K and 216.55 K respectively. Express these temperatures on the Celsius and Fahrenheit scales. 10.2 Two absolute scales A and B have triple points of water defined to be 200 A and    350 B. What is the relation between TA and TB? 10.3 The electrical resistance in ohms of a certain thermometer varies with temperature according to the approximate law : R = Ro [1 + α (T – To )] The resistance is 101.6 Ω at the triple-point of water 273

.6 Ω at the triple-point of water 273.16 K, and 165.5 Ω at the normal melting point of lead (600.5 K). What is the temperature when the resistance is 123.4 Ω ? 10.4 Answer the following : (a) The triple-point of water is a standard fixed point in modern thermometry. Why ? What is wrong in taking the melting point of ice and the boiling point of water as standard fixed points (as was originally done in the Celsius scale) ? (b) There were two fixed points in the original Celsius scale as mentioned above which were assigned the number 0  °C and 100  °C respectively. On the absolute scale, one of the fixed points is the triple-point of water , which on the Kelvin absolute scale is assigned the number 273.16 K. What is the other fixed point on this (Kelvin) scale ? (c) The absolute temperature (Kelvin scale) T is related to the temperature tc on the Celsius scale by tc = T – 273.15 Why do we have 273.15 in this relation, and not 273

.15 Why do we have 273.15 in this relation, and not 273.16 ? (d) What is the temperature of the triple-point of water on an absolute scale whose unit interval size is equal to that of the Fahrenheit scale ? 10.5 Two ideal gas thermometers A and B use oxygen and hydrogen respectively.  The following observations are made : 2024-25  224 PHYSICS Temperature Pressure Pressure thermometer A thermometer B Triple-point of water 1.250 × 105 Pa 0.200 × 105 Pa Normal melting point 1.797 × 105 Pa 0.287 × 105 Pa of sulphur (a) What is the absolute temperatur e of nor mal melting point of sulphur as r ead by ther mometers A and B ? (b) What do you think is the r eason behind the slight dif ference in answers of thermometers A and B ? (The ther mometers ar e not faulty). What further procedur e is needed in the experiment to r educe  the discr epancy between the two readings ? 10.6 A steel tape 1m long is correctly calibrated for a temperature of 27.0  °C.  The length of a steel rod measured by this tape is found to be 63

.6 A steel tape 1m long is correctly calibrated for a temperature of 27.0  °C.  The length of a steel rod measured by this tape is found to be 63.0 cm on a hot day when the temperature is 45.0  °C. What is the actual length of the steel rod on that day ? What is the length of the same steel rod on a day when the temperature is 27.0  °C ?  Coefficient of linear expansion of steel = 1.20  × 10–5 K–1 . 10.7 A large steel wheel is to be fitted on to a shaft of the same material. At 27  °C, the outer diameter of the shaft is 8.70 cm and the diameter of the central hole in the wheel is 8.69 cm. The shaft is cooled using ‘dry ice’. At what temperatur e of the shaft does the wheel slip on the shaft? Assume coef ficient of linear expansion of the steel to be constant over the r equir ed temperatur e range : αsteel = 1.20  × 10–5 K–1. 10.8 A hole is drilled in a copper sheet. The diameter of the hole is 4.24 cm at 27.0  °C

.20  × 10–5 K–1. 10.8 A hole is drilled in a copper sheet. The diameter of the hole is 4.24 cm at 27.0  °C. What is the change in the diameter of the hole when the sheet is heated to 227 °C? Coefficient of linear expansion of copper = 1.70  × 10–5 K–1. 10.9 A brass wire 1.8 m long at 27  °C is held taut with little tension between two rigid supports. If the wire is cooled to a temperature of –39  °C, what is the tension developed in the  wire, if its diameter is 2.0 mm ?  Co-efficient of linear expansion of  brass = 2.0  × 10–5 K–1; Young’s modulus of brass = 0.91  × 1011 Pa. 10.10 A brass rod of length 50 cm and diameter 3.0 mm is joined to a steel rod of the same length and diameter . What is the change in length of the combined r od at 250  °C, if the original lengths are at 40.0  °C?  Is there a ‘thermal stress’ developed at the junction ? The ends of the rod are free to expand (Co-efficient of linear expansion of brass = 2.0 × 10–5 K–1, steel = 1.2 × 10–5 K–1 ). 10

.0  °C?  Is there a ‘thermal stress’ developed at the junction ? The ends of the rod are free to expand (Co-efficient of linear expansion of brass = 2.0 × 10–5 K–1, steel = 1.2 × 10–5 K–1 ). 10.11 The coefficient of volume expansion of glycerine is 49  × 10–5 K–1.  What is the fractional change in its density for a 30  °C rise in temperature ? 10.12 A 10 kW drilling machine is used to drill a bore in a small aluminium block of mass 8.0 kg.  How much is the rise in temperature of the block in 2.5 minutes, assuming 50% of power is used up in heating the machine itself or lost to the surroundings. Specific heat of aluminium = 0.91 J g–1 K–1. 10.13 A copper block of mass 2.5 kg is heated in a furnace to a temperature of 500  °C and then placed on a large ice block. What is the maximum amount of  ice that can melt?  (Specific heat of copper = 0.39 J g–1 K–1; heat of fusion of water = 335 J g–1 ). 10.14 In an experiment on the specific heat of a metal, a 0

. What is the maximum amount of  ice that can melt?  (Specific heat of copper = 0.39 J g–1 K–1; heat of fusion of water = 335 J g–1 ). 10.14 In an experiment on the specific heat of a metal, a 0.20 kg block of the metal at 150  °C is dropped in a copper calorimeter (of water equivalent 0.025 kg) containing 150 cm3 of water at 27  °C. The final temperature is 40  °C. Compute the specific heat of the metal. If heat losses to the surroundings are not negligible, is your answer greater or smaller than the actual value for specific heat of the metal ? 10.15 Given below are observations on molar specific heats at room temperature of some common gases. 2024-25  THERMAL PROPER TIES OF MA TTER 225 Gas Molar specific heat (Cv ) (cal mo1–1 K–1) Hydrogen 4.87 Nitrogen 4.97 Oxygen 5.02 Nitric oxide 4.99 Carbon monoxide 5.01 Chlorine 6.17 The measured molar specific heats of these gases are markedly different from those for monatomic gases.  Typically, molar specific heat of a monatomic gas is 2.92 cal/mol K

.01 Chlorine 6.17 The measured molar specific heats of these gases are markedly different from those for monatomic gases.  Typically, molar specific heat of a monatomic gas is 2.92 cal/mol K.  Explain this dif ference.  What can you infer fr om the somewhat larger (than the rest) value for  chlorine ? 10.16 A child running a temperature of 101 °F is given an antipyrin (i.e. a medicine that lowers fever) which causes an incr ease in the rate of evaporation of sweat fr om his body. If the fever is brought down to 98  °F in 20 minutes, what is the average rate of extra evaporation caused, by the drug. Assume the evaporation mechanism to be the only way by which heat is lost.  The mass of the child is 30 kg.  The specific heat of human body is appr oximately the same as that of water , and latent heat of evaporation of water at that temperature is about 580 cal g–1. 10.17 A ‘thermacole’ icebox is a cheap and an efficient method for storing small quantities of cooked food in summer in particular

. 10.17 A ‘thermacole’ icebox is a cheap and an efficient method for storing small quantities of cooked food in summer in particular . A cubical icebox of side 30 cm has a thickness of 5.0 cm. If 4.0 kg of ice is put in the box, estimate the amount of ice remaining after 6 h. The outside temperature is 45  °C, and co-efficient of thermal conductivity of thermacole is 0.01 J s–1 m–1 K–1. [Heat of fusion of water = 335  × 103 J kg–1] 10.18 A brass boiler has a base area of 0.15 m2 and thickness 1.0 cm.  It boils water at the rate of 6.0 kg/min when placed on a gas stove.  Estimate the temperatur e of the part of the flame in contact with the boiler .  Ther mal conductivity of brass = 109 J s–1 m–1 K–1 ;  Heat of vapori sation of water =  2256  × 103 J kg–1. 10

.  Estimate the temperatur e of the part of the flame in contact with the boiler .  Ther mal conductivity of brass = 109 J s–1 m–1 K–1 ;  Heat of vapori sation of water =  2256  × 103 J kg–1. 10.19 Explain why : (a)a body with lar ge reflectivity is a poor emitter (b)a brass tumbler feels much colder than a wooden tray on a chilly day (c)an optical pyr ometer (for measuring high temperatur es) calibrated for an ideal black body radiation gives too low a value for the temperatur e of a r ed hot iron piece in the open, but gives a correct value for the temperature when the same piece is  in the furnace (d) the earth without its atmosphere would be inhospitably cold (e)heating systems based on circulation of  steam are more efficient in warming a building than those based on circulation of hot water 10.20 A body cools from 80 °C to 50 °C in 5 minutes. Calculate the time it takes to cool from 60  °C to 30  °C. The temperature of the surroundings is 20  °C. 2024-25  CHAPTER  ELEVEN THERMODYNAMICS 11

.20 A body cools from 80 °C to 50 °C in 5 minutes. Calculate the time it takes to cool from 60  °C to 30  °C. The temperature of the surroundings is 20  °C. 2024-25  CHAPTER  ELEVEN THERMODYNAMICS 11.1  INTRODUCTION In previous chapter we have studied thermal properties of matter . In this chapter we shall study laws that gover n thermal ener gy. W e shall study the pr ocesses wher e work is converted into heat and vice versa. In winter , when we rub our palms together , we feel war mer; her e work done in rubbing produces the  ‘heat’.  Conversely, in a steam engine, the ‘heat’ of the steam is used to do useful work in moving the pistons, which in turn rotate the wheels of the train. In physics, we need to define the notions of heat, temperature, work, etc. more carefully.  Historically, it took a long time to arrive at the proper concept of ‘heat’. Before the modern picture, heat was regarded as a fine invisible fluid filling in the pores of a substance

.  Historically, it took a long time to arrive at the proper concept of ‘heat’. Before the modern picture, heat was regarded as a fine invisible fluid filling in the pores of a substance.  On contact between a hot body and a cold body, the fluid  (called caloric) flowed from the colder to the hotter bod y! This is similar to what happens when a horizontal pipe connects two tanks containing water up to different heights. The flow continues until the levels of water in the two tanks are the same.  Likewise, in the ‘caloric’ picture of heat, heat flows until the ‘caloric levels’ (i.e., the temperatures) equalise. In time, the picture of heat as a fluid was discarded in favour of the modern concept of heat as a form of energy. An important experiment in this connection was due to Benjamin Thomson (also known as Count Rumford) in 1798. He observed that boring of a brass cannon generated a lot of heat, indeed enough to boil water

. He observed that boring of a brass cannon generated a lot of heat, indeed enough to boil water . Mor e significantly, the amount of heat produced depended on the work done (by the horses employed for turning the drill) but not on the sharpness of the drill. In the caloric picture, a sharper drill would scoop out more heat fluid from the pores; but this was not observed. A most natural explanation of the observations was that heat was a form of energy and the experiment demonstrated conversion of energy from one form to another–from work to heat.11.1 Introduction 11.2Thermal equilibrium 11.3Zeroth law of Thermodynamics 11.4Heat, internal energy and work 11.5First law of thermodynamics 11.6Specific heat capacity 11.7Thermodynamic state variables and e quation of state 11.8Thermodynamic processes 11.9Second law of thermodynamics 11.10Reversible and irreversible processes 11

.6Specific heat capacity 11.7Thermodynamic state variables and e quation of state 11.8Thermodynamic processes 11.9Second law of thermodynamics 11.10Reversible and irreversible processes 11.11Carnot engine Summary Points to ponder Exercises 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 227 Thermodynamics is the branch of physics that deals with the concepts of heat and temperature and the inter -conversion of heat and other for ms of energy. Thermodynamics is a macroscopic science. It deals with bulk systems and does not go into the molecular constitution of matter . In fact, its concepts and laws were formulated in the nineteenth century before the molecular picture of matter was firmly established.  Thermodynamic description involves relatively few macroscopic variables of the system, which are suggested by common sense and can be usually measured directly. A microscopic description of a gas, for example, would involve specifying the co-ordinates and velocities of the huge number of molecules constituting the gas

. A microscopic description of a gas, for example, would involve specifying the co-ordinates and velocities of the huge number of molecules constituting the gas. The description in kinetic theory of gases is not so detailed but it does involve molecular distribution of velocities. Thermodynamic description of a gas, on the other hand, avoids the molecular description altogether . Instead, the state of a gas in thermodynamics is specified by macroscopic variables such as pressure, volume, temperature, mass and composition that  are felt by our sense perceptions and are measurable *. The distinction between mechanics and thermodynamics is worth bearing in mind.  In mechanics, our interest is in the motion of particles or bodies under the action of forces and torques. Thermodynamics is not concerned with the motion of the system as a whole.  It is concerned with the internal macroscopic state of the body

. Thermodynamics is not concerned with the motion of the system as a whole.  It is concerned with the internal macroscopic state of the body. When a bullet is fired from a gun, what changes is the mechanical state of the bullet (its kinetic energy, in particular), not its temperature.  When the bullet pierces a wood and stops, the kinetic energy of the bullet gets converted into heat, changing the temperature of the bullet and the surrounding layers of wood.  Temperature is related to the energy of the internal (disordered) motion of the bullet, not to the motion of the bullet as a whole. 11.2  THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM Equilibrium in mechanics means that the net external force and torque on a system are zero. The term ‘equilibrium’ in thermodynamics appearsin a different context  : we say the state of a system is an equilibrium state if the macroscopic variables that characterise the system do not change in time

. For example, a gas inside a closed rigid container , completely insulated fr om its surroundings, with fixed values of pressure, volume, temperature, mass and composition that do not change with time, is in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium. Fig. 11.1 (a) Systems A and B (two gases) separated by an adiabatic wall  – an insulating wall that does not allow flow of heat. (b) The same systems A and B separated by a diathermic wall  – a conducting wall that allows heat to flow fr om one to another .  In this case, thermal equilibrium is attained in due course . In general, whether or not a system is in a state of equilibrium depends on the surroundings and the nature of the wall that separates the system from the surroundings.  Consider two gases A and B occupying two dif ferent containers. W e know experimentally that pressure and volume of a given mass of gas can be chosen to be its two independent variables. Let the pressure and volume of the gases be ( PA, VA) and ( PB, VB) respectively

. Let the pressure and volume of the gases be ( PA, VA) and ( PB, VB) respectively.  Suppose first that the two systems are put in proximity but are separated by an(a) (b) *Thermodynamics may also involve other variables that are not so obvious to our senses  e.g. entropy, enthalpy, etc., and they ar e all macr oscopic variables. However , a ther modynamic state is specified by five state variables viz., pressure, volume, temperature, internal energy and entropy. Entropy is a measure of disorderness in the system. Enthalpy is a measure of total heat content of the system. 2024-25  PHYSICS 228 adiabatic wall  – an insulating wall (can be movable) that does not allow flow of energy (heat) from one to another . The systems ar e insulated from the rest of the surroundings also by similar adiabatic walls. The situation is shown schematically in Fig. 1 1.1 (a). In this case, it is found that any possible pair of values ( PA, VA) will be in equilibrium with any possible pair of values (PB, VB)

. The situation is shown schematically in Fig. 1 1.1 (a). In this case, it is found that any possible pair of values ( PA, VA) will be in equilibrium with any possible pair of values (PB, VB).  Next, suppose that the adiabatic wall is replaced by a diathermic wal l–a conducting wall that allows ener gy flow (heat) fr om one to another . It is then found that the macroscopic variables of the systems A and B change spontaneously until both the systems attain equilibrium states. After that there is no change in their states. The situation is shown in Fig.  11.1(b).  The pressure and volume variables of the two gases change to (PB′, VB′) and ( PA′, VA′) such that the new states of A and B are in equilibrium with each other *. There is no mor e ener gy flow from one to another . We then say that the system A is in ther mal equilibrium with the system B. What characterises the situation of thermal equilibrium between two systems ? Y ou can guess the answer from your experience

. What characterises the situation of thermal equilibrium between two systems ? Y ou can guess the answer from your experience. In thermal equilibrium, the temperatures of the two systems are equal. W e shall see how does one arrive at the concept of temperature in thermodynamics? The Zeroth law of thermodynamics provides the clue. 11.3  ZEROTH LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS Imagine two systems A and B, separated by an adiabatic wall, while each is in contact with a third system C, via a conducting wall [Fig. 1 1.2(a)]. The states of the systems (i.e. , their macroscopic variables) will change until both A and B come to thermal equilibrium with C. After this is achieved, suppose that the adiabatic wall between A and B is replaced by a conducting wall and C is insulated from A and B by an adiabatic wall [Fig.1 1.2(b)]. It is found that the states of A and B change no further i.e. they are found to be in thermal equilibrium with each other

.1 1.2(b)]. It is found that the states of A and B change no further i.e. they are found to be in thermal equilibrium with each other . This observation forms the basis of the Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics , which states that ‘two systems in thermal equilibrium with a third system separately are in thermal equilibrium with each  other’ .  R.H. Fowler formulated thislaw in 1931 long after the first and second Laws of thermodynamics were stated and so numbered . The Zeroth Law clearly suggests that when two systems A and B, are in thermal equilibrium, there must be a physical quantity that has the same value for both. This thermodynamic variable whose value is equal for two systems in thermal equilibrium is called temperature ( T). Thus, if A and B are separately in equilibrium with C, TA = TC  and TB = TC.  This implies that TA = TB i.e. the systems A and B are also in thermal equilibrium. We have arrived at the concept of temperatur e formally via the Zeroth Law

.  This implies that TA = TB i.e. the systems A and B are also in thermal equilibrium. We have arrived at the concept of temperatur e formally via the Zeroth Law.  The next question is :how to assign numerical values to temperatures of different bodies  ?  In other words, how do we construct a scale of temperature  ? Thermometry deals with this basic question to which we turn in the next section. Fig. 11.2 (a) Systems A and B are separated by an adiabatic wall, while each is in contact with a third system C via a conducting wall. (b) The adiabatic wall between  A and B is replaced by a conducting wall, while C is insulated from A and B by an adiabatic wall. *Both the variables need not change. It depends on the constraints. For instance, if the gases are in containers of fixed volume, only the pressures of the gases would change to achieve thermal equilibrium.(a) (b) 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 229 11

. For instance, if the gases are in containers of fixed volume, only the pressures of the gases would change to achieve thermal equilibrium.(a) (b) 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 229 11.4  HEAT, INTERNAL ENERGY AND WORK The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics led us to the concept of temperature that agrees with our commonsense notion.  Temperature is a marker of the ‘hotness’ of a body. It determines the direction of flow of heat when two bodies are placed in thermal contact.  Heat flows from the body at a higher temperature to the one at lower temperature. The flow stops when the temperatures equalise; the two bodies are then in ther mal equilibrium. W e saw in some detail how to construct temperature scales to assign temperatures to dif ferent bodies. W e now describe the concepts of heat and other relevant quantities like internal energy and work. The concept of internal energy of a system is not dif ficult to understand.  W e know that every bulk system consists of a large number of molecules

. The concept of internal energy of a system is not dif ficult to understand.  W e know that every bulk system consists of a large number of molecules.  Internal energy is simply the sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies of these molecules. W e remarked earlier that in thermodynamics, the kinetic energy of the system, as a whole, is not relevant.  Internal energy is thus, the sum of molecular kinetic and potential energies in the frame of reference relative to which the centre of mass of the system is at rest. Thus, it includes only the (disordered) energy associated with the random motion of molecules of the system. W e denote the inter nal energy of a system by U. Though we have invoked the molecular picture to understand the meaning of internal energy, as far as thermodynamics is concerned, U is simply a macroscopic variable of the system. The important thing about internal energy is that it depends only on the state of the system, not on how that state was achieved

. The important thing about internal energy is that it depends only on the state of the system, not on how that state was achieved.  Internal energy U of a system is an example of a thermodynamic ‘state variable’ – its value depends only on the given state of the system, not on history i.e. not on the ‘path’ taken to arrive at that state. Thus, the internal energy of a given mass of gas depends on its state described by specific values of pressure, volume and temperature. It does not depend on how this state of the gas came about. Pressure, volume, temperature, and internal energy are thermodynamic state variables of the system (gas) (see section 11.7). If we neglect the small intermolecular forces in a gas, the internal energy of a gas is just the sum of kinetic energiesassociated with various random motions of its molecules.  W e will see in the next chapter that in a gas this motion is not only translational (i.e

.  W e will see in the next chapter that in a gas this motion is not only translational (i.e. motion from one point to another in the volume of the container); it also includes rotational and vibrational motion of the molecules (Fig. 11.3). Fig. 11.3 (a) Internal energy U of a gas is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of  its molecules when the box is at rest. Kinetic energy due to various types of motion (translational,  rotational, vibrational) is to be included in U.  (b) If the same box is moving as a whole with some velocity, the kinetic energy of the box is not to be included in U . Fig. 11.4 Heat and work are two distinct modes of energy transfer to a system that results  in change in its internal energy. (a) Heat is energy transfer due to temperature difference between the system and the surroundings.  (b) W ork is ener gy transfer brought about by means (e.g. moving the piston by raising or lowering some weight connected to it) that do not involve such a temperature difference

.  (b) W ork is ener gy transfer brought about by means (e.g. moving the piston by raising or lowering some weight connected to it) that do not involve such a temperature difference. 2024-25  PHYSICS 230 What are the ways of changing internal energy of a system ? Consider again, for simplicity, the system to be a certain mass of gas contained in a cylinder with a movable piston as shown in Fig. 11.4.  Experience shows there are two ways of changing the state of the gas (and hence its internal energy).  One way is to put the cylinder in contact with a body at a higher temperature than that of the gas. The temperature difference will cause a flow of energy (heat) from the hotter body to the gas, thus increasing the internal energy of the gas. The other way is to push the piston down i.e. to do work on the system, which again results in increasing the internal energy of the gas.  Of course, both these things could happen in the reverse direction

.e. to do work on the system, which again results in increasing the internal energy of the gas.  Of course, both these things could happen in the reverse direction. With surroundings at a lower temperature, heat would flow from the gas to the surroundings.  Likewise, the g as could push the piston up and do work on the surroundings. In short, heat and work are two different modes of altering the state of a thermodynamic system and changing its internal energy. The notion of heat should be carefully distinguished from the notion of internal energy. Heat is certainly energy, but it is the energy in transit.  This is not just a play of words.  The distinction is of basic significance. The state of a thermodynamic system is characterised by its internal energy, not heat. A statement like ‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount of heat’  is as meaningless as the statement that ‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount of work’

. A statement like ‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount of heat’  is as meaningless as the statement that ‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount of work’ .  In contrast, ‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount of internal energy’  is a perfectly meaningful statement. Similarly, the statements ‘a certain amount of heat is supplied to the system’ or ‘a certain amount of work was done by the system’ are perfectly meaningful. To summarise, heat and work in thermodynamics are not state variables. They are modes of energy transfer to a system resulting in change in its internal energy, which, as already mentioned, is a state variable. In ordinary language, we often confuse heat with internal energy.  The distinction between them is sometimes ignored in elementary physics books. For proper understanding of thermodynamics, however , the distinction is crucial.11

.  The distinction between them is sometimes ignored in elementary physics books. For proper understanding of thermodynamics, however , the distinction is crucial.11.5  FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS We have seen that the inter nal ener gy U of a system can change through two modes of energy transfer : heat and work.  Let ∆Q=Heat supplied to the system by the surroundings ∆W=Work done by the system on the surroundings ∆U=Change in internal energy of the system The general principle of conservation of energy then implies that ∆Q=  ∆U + ∆W (11.1) i.e. the energy ( ∆Q) supplied to the system goes in partly to increase the internal energy of the system ( ∆U) and the rest in work on the environment ( ∆W). Equation (11.1) is known as the First Law of Thermodynamics .  It is simply the general law of conservation of energy applied to any system in which the energy transfer from or to the surroundings is taken into account. Let us put Eq. (1 1.1) in the alternative form ∆Q  – ∆W  = ∆U (11

. Let us put Eq. (1 1.1) in the alternative form ∆Q  – ∆W  = ∆U (11.2) Now, the system may go from an initial state to the final state in a number of ways. For example, to change the state of a gas from (P1, V1) to ( P2, V2), we can first change the volume of the gas from V1 to V2, keeping its pressure constant i.e. we can first go the state (P1, V2) and then change the pressure of the gas from P1 to P2, keeping volume constant, to take the gas to ( P2, V2).  Alternatively, we can first keep the volume constant and then keep the pressure constant. Since U is a state variable, ∆U depends only on the initial and final states and not on the path taken by the gas to go fr om one to the other . However , ∆Q and ∆W will, in general, depend on the path taken to go from the initial to final states. From the First Law of Thermodynamics,  Eq. (11.2), it is clear that the combination ∆Q – ∆W, is however , path independent

. From the First Law of Thermodynamics,  Eq. (11.2), it is clear that the combination ∆Q – ∆W, is however , path independent. This shows that if a system is taken through a process in which ∆U = 0 (for example, isothermal expansion of an ideal gas, see section 1 1.8), ∆Q  = ∆W i.e., heat supplied to the system is used up entirely by the system in doing work on the environment. 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 231 If the system is a gas in a cylinder with a movable piston, the gas in moving the piston does work. Since force is pressure times area, and area times displacement is volume, work done by the system against a constant pressure P is ∆W  = P ∆V where ∆V is the change in volume of the gas. Thus, for this case, Eq. (11.1) gives ∆Q  = ∆U + P∆V (11.3) As an applicatio n of Eq. (1 1.3), consider the change in internal energy for 1 g of water when we go from its liquid to vapour phase. The measured latent heat of water is 2256 J /g. i.e. , for 1 g of water ∆Q = 2256 J

. (1 1.3), consider the change in internal energy for 1 g of water when we go from its liquid to vapour phase. The measured latent heat of water is 2256 J /g. i.e. , for 1 g of water ∆Q = 2256 J. At atmospheric pressure, 1 g of water has a volume 1 cm3 in liquid phase and 1671 cm3 in vapour phase. Therefore, ∆W =P(Vg –Vl ) = 1.013 ×105 × (1671 × 10–6) =169.2 J Equation (11.3) then gives ∆U = 2256 – 169.2  =  2086.8 J We see that most of the heat goes to incr ease the internal energy of water in transition from the liquid to the vapour phase. 11.6  SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY Suppose an amount of heat ∆Q supplied to a substance changes its temperature from T to T + ∆T.  We define heat capacity of a substance (see Chapter 10) to be TQS∆∆=  (11.4) We expect ∆Q and, ther efore, heat capacity S to be proportional to the mass of the substance. Further , it could also depend on the temperature, i.e., a different amount of heat may be needed for a unit rise in temperature at different temperatures

. Further , it could also depend on the temperature, i.e., a different amount of heat may be needed for a unit rise in temperature at different temperatures. To define a constant characteristic of the substance and independent of its amount, we divide S by the mass of the substance m  in kg : sS m mQ T    = =  1∆ ∆(11.5) s is known as the specific heat capacity of the substance. It depends on the nature of the substance and its temperature.  The unit of specific heat capacity is J kg–1 K–1.If the amount of substance is specified in terms of moles µ (instead of mass m in kg ), we can define heat capacity per mole of the substance by 1S QCTµ µ∆= =∆(11.6) C is known as molar specific heat capacity of the substance. Like s, C is independent of the amount of substance. C depends on the nature of the s ubstance, its temperature and the conditions under which heat is supplied. The unit of C is J m o1–1 K–1

. Like s, C is independent of the amount of substance. C depends on the nature of the s ubstance, its temperature and the conditions under which heat is supplied. The unit of C is J m o1–1 K–1. As we shall see later (in connection with specific heat capacity of gases), additional conditions may be needed to define C or s. The idea in defining C is that simple predictions can be made in regard to molar specific heat capacities. Table 11.1 lists measured specific and molar heat capacities of solids at atmospheric pressure and ordinary room temperature. We will see in Chapter 12 that pr edictions of specific heats of gases generally agree with experiment. W e can use the same law of equipartition of energy that we use there to predict molar specific heat capacities of solids (See Section 12.5 and 12.6).  Consider a solid of N atoms, each vibrating about its mean position. An oscillator in one dimension has average energy of 2 × ½ kBT = kBT. In three dimensions, the average energy is 3 kBT

.6).  Consider a solid of N atoms, each vibrating about its mean position. An oscillator in one dimension has average energy of 2 × ½ kBT = kBT. In three dimensions, the average energy is 3 kBT. For a mole of a solid, the total energy is U  = 3 kBT  × NA  = 3 RT  (∵kBT  × NA = R) Now, at constant pressure, ∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V ≅ ∆U,  since for a solid ∆ V is negligible.  Therefore, CQ TU TR = = =∆ ∆∆ ∆3 (11.7) Table 11.1 Specific and molar heat capacities of some solids at room temperature and atmospheric pressure    As Table 1 1.1 shows, the experimentally measured values which  generally agrees withSubstanceSpeci/UNIf001c heat–v (J kg K )–1 –1Molar speci/UNIf001c heat (J mol K )–1 –1 2024-25  PHYSICS 232 predicted value 3R at ordinary temperatures. (Carbon is an exception.) The agreement is known to break down at low temperatures. Specific heat capacity of water The old unit of heat was calorie.  One calorie was earlier defined to be the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1g of water by 1°C

. Specific heat capacity of water The old unit of heat was calorie.  One calorie was earlier defined to be the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1g of water by 1°C. With more precise measurements, it was found that the  specific heat of water varies slightly with temperature.  Figure 1 1.5 shows this variation in the temperature range 0 to 100 °C. Fig. 11.5 Variation of specific heat capacity of water with temperature. For a precise definition of calorie, it was, therefore, necessary to specify the unit temperature interval. One calorie is defined to be the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1g of water from 14.5  °C to 15.5 °C. Since heat is just a form of energy, it is preferable to use the unit joule, J. In SI units, the specific heat  capacity  of water is 4186 J kg–1 K–1 i.e. 4.186 J g–1 K–1

.5  °C to 15.5 °C. Since heat is just a form of energy, it is preferable to use the unit joule, J. In SI units, the specific heat  capacity  of water is 4186 J kg–1 K–1 i.e. 4.186 J g–1 K–1. The so called mechanical equivalent of heat defined as the amount of work needed to produce 1 cal of heat is in fact just a conversion factor between two different units of energy : calorie to joule. Since in SI units, we use the unit joule for heat, work or any other form of energy, the term mechanical equivalent is now superfluous and need not be used. As already remarked, the specific heat capacity depends on the process or the conditions under which heat capacity transfer takes place.  For gases, for example, we can define two specific heats  : specific heat capacity at constant volume and specific heat capacity at constant pressure .  For anideal gas, we have a simple relation.         Cp  –  Cv = R (11

.  For anideal gas, we have a simple relation.         Cp  –  Cv = R (11.8) where Cp and Cv  are molar specific heat capacities  of an ideal gas at constant pressure and volume respectively and R is the universal gas constant.  To prove the relation, we begin with Eq. (1 1.3) for 1 mole of the gas  :                 ∆Q  = ∆U + P ∆V If ∆Q  is absorbed at constant volume, ∆V = 0    CQ TU TU Tv v v=  =  =  ∆ ∆∆ ∆∆ ∆(11.9) where the subscript v is dropped in the last step, since U of an ideal gas depends only on temperature. (The subscript denotes the quantity kept fixed.) If, on the other hand, ∆Q is absorbed at constant pressure, CQ TU T PV Tp p p p   =  =  +  ∆ ∆∆ ∆∆ ∆(11.10) The subscript p can be dropped from the first term since U of an ideal gas depends only on T.  Now , for a mole of an ideal gas                 PV = RT which gives     PV TR    p∆ ∆  =(11.11) Equations (1 1.9) to (1 1.11) give the desired relation, Eq. (1 1.8). 11

.  Now , for a mole of an ideal gas                 PV = RT which gives     PV TR    p∆ ∆  =(11.11) Equations (1 1.9) to (1 1.11) give the desired relation, Eq. (1 1.8). 11.7THERMODYNAMIC STATE VARIABLES AND EQUATION OF STATE Every equilibrium state  of a thermodynamic system is completely described by specific values of some macroscopic variables, also called state variables. For example, an equilibrium state of a gas is completely specified by the values of pressure, volume, temperature, and mass (and composition if there is a mixture of gases). A thermodynamic system is not always in equilibrium. For example, a gas allowed to expand freely  against vacuum is not an equilibrium state [Fig. 11.6(a)].  During the rapid expansion, pressure of the gas may 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 233 not be uniform throughout. Similarly, a mixture of gases undergoing an explosive chemical reaction (e.g

. 11.6(a)].  During the rapid expansion, pressure of the gas may 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 233 not be uniform throughout. Similarly, a mixture of gases undergoing an explosive chemical reaction (e.g. a mixture of petrol vapour and air when ignited by a spark) is not an equilibrium state; again its temperature and pressure are not uniform [Fig. 1 1.6(b)]. Eventually, the gas attains a uniform temperature and pressure and comes to thermal and mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings. Fig. 11.6 (a) The partition in the box is suddenly removed leading to free expansion of the gas. (b) A mixture of gases undergoing an explosive chemical reaction. In both situations, the gas is not in equilibrium and cannot be described by state variables. In short, thermodynamic state variables describe equilibrium states of systems. The various state variables are not necessarily independent. The connection between the state variables is called the equation of state

. The various state variables are not necessarily independent. The connection between the state variables is called the equation of state. For example, for an ideal gas, the equation of state is the ideal gas relation    P V = µ R T For a fixed amount of the gas i.e. given µ, there are thus, only two independent variables, say P and V or T and V.  The pr essur e-volume curve for a fixed temperature is called an isotherm . Real gases may have more complicated equations of state. The thermodynamic state variables are of two kinds: extensive  and intensive . Extensive variables indicate the ‘size’ of the system. Intensive variables such as pressure andtemperature do not. To decide which variable is extensive and which intensive, think of a relevant system in equilibrium, and imagine that it is divided into two equal parts. The variables that remain unchanged for each part are intensive. The variables whose values get halved in each part are extensive

. The variables that remain unchanged for each part are intensive. The variables whose values get halved in each part are extensive. It is easily seen, for example, that internal energy U, volume V, total mass M are extensive variables. Pr essur e P, temperature T, and density ρ are intensive variables.  It is a good practice to check the consistency of thermodynamic equations using this classification of variables. For example, in the equation       ∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V quantities on both sides are extensive *. (The product of an intensive variable like P and an extensive quantity ∆V is extensive.) 11.8  THERMODYNAMIC PROCESSES 11.8.1  Quasi-static process Consider a gas in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings. The pressure of the gas in that case equals the external pressure and its temperature is the same as that of its surroundings. Suppose that the external pressure is suddenly reduced (say by lifting the weight on the movable piston in the container).  The piston will accelerate outward

. Suppose that the external pressure is suddenly reduced (say by lifting the weight on the movable piston in the container).  The piston will accelerate outward. During the process, the gas passes through states that are not equilibrium states. The non- equilibrium states do not have well-defined pressure and temperature. In the same way, if a finite temperature difference exists between the gas and its surroundings, there will be a rapid exchange of heat during which the gas will pass through non-equilibrium states.  In due course, the gas will settle to an equilibrium state with well-defined temperature and pressure equal to those of the surroundings. The free expansion of a gas in vacuum and a mixture of gases undergoing an explosive chemical reaction, mentioned in section 11.7 are also examples where the system goes through non- equilibrium states. Non-equilibrium states of a system are difficult to deal with

.7 are also examples where the system goes through non- equilibrium states. Non-equilibrium states of a system are difficult to deal with.  It is, therefore, convenient to imagine an ideali sed process in which at every stage the system is an equilibrium state.  Such a *As emphasised earlier , Q is not a state variable.  However , ∆Q is clearly pr oportional to the total mass of system and hence is extensive. 2024-25  PHYSICS 234 process is, in principle, infinitely slow , hence the name quasi-static (meaning nearly static). The system changes its variables ( P, T, V) so slowly that it remains in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings throughout. In a quasi-static process, at every stage, the difference in the pressure of the system and the external pressure is infinitesimally small.  The same is true of the temperature difference between the system and its surroundings (Fig.11.7)

.  The same is true of the temperature difference between the system and its surroundings (Fig.11.7) .  To take a gas fr om the state ( P, T) to another state ( P ′, T ′ ) via  a quasi-static process, we change the external pressure by a very small amount, allow the system to equalise its pressure with that of the surroundings and continue the process infinitely slowly until the system achieves the pressure P ′. Similarly, to change the temperature, we introduce an infinitesimal temperature difference between the system and the surrounding reservoirs and by choosing reservoirs of progressively different temperatures T to T ′, the system achieves the temperature T ′. Fig. 11.7 In a quasi-stati c process, the temperature of the surrounding reservoir and the external pressure differ only infinitesimally from the temperature and pressure of the system. A quasi-static process is obviously a hypothetical construct

. A quasi-static process is obviously a hypothetical construct.  In practice, processes that are sufficiently slow and do not involve accelerated motion of the piston, large temperature gradient, etc., are reasonably approximation to an ideal quasi-static process. We shall fr om now on deal with quasi-static processes only, except when stated otherwise.A process in which the temperature of the system is kept fixed throughout is called an isothermal process .  The expansion of a gas in a metallic cylinder placed in a large reservoir of fixed temperature is an example of an isothermal process.  (Heat transferred from the reservoir to the system does not materially affect the temperature of the r eservoir , because of its very large heat capacity.)  In isobaric processes  the pressure is constant while in isochoric processes the volume is constant. Finally, if the system is insulated from the surroundings and no heat flows between the system and the surroundings, the process is adiabatic

. Finally, if the system is insulated from the surroundings and no heat flows between the system and the surroundings, the process is adiabatic . The definitions of these special processes are summarised in Table. 11.2 Table 11.2 Some special thermodynamic processes We now consider these pr ocesses in some detai l: 11.8.2 Isothermal process For an isothermal process ( T fixed), the ideal gas equation gives                   PV  =  constant i.e., pressure of a  given mass of gas varies inversely as its volume. This is nothing but Boyle’s Law. Suppose an ideal gas goes isothermally (at temperature T) from its initial state ( P1, V1) to the final state ( P2, V 2).  At any intermediate stage with pressure P and volume change from V to V + ∆V (∆V small)      ∆W  = P ∆ V Taking ( ∆V → 0) and summing the quantity ∆W over the entire process, W = P V VV 12  d∫ =  RT VV RT    V VV V 122 1µ µd∫=     In(11

.12) 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 235 where in the second  step we have made use of the ideal gas equation PV = µ RT and  taken the constants out of the integral.  For an ideal gas, internal energy depends only on temperature. Thus, there is no change in the internal energy of an ideal gas in an isothermal process. The First Law of Thermodynamics then implies that heat supplied to the gas equals the work done by the gas : Q = W.  Note fr om Eq. (11.12) that for V2 > V1,  W > 0; and for V2 < V1, W < 0.  That is, in an isothermal expansion, the gas absorbs heat and does work while in an isothermal compression, work is  done on the gas by the environment and heat is released. 11.8.3 Adiabatic process In an  adiabatic process, the system is insulated from the surroundings and heat absorbed or released is zero. From Eq. (11.1), we see that work done by the gas results in decrease in its internal energy (and hence its temperature for an ideal gas)

. From Eq. (11.1), we see that work done by the gas results in decrease in its internal energy (and hence its temperature for an ideal gas).  W e quote without pr oof (the r esult that you will learn in higher courses) that for an adiaba tic process of an ideal gas.     P V γ   =  const (11.13) where γ  is the ratio of specific heats (ordinary or molar) at constant pressure and at constant volume.                γ=Cp Cv Thus if an ideal gas undergoes a change in its state adiabatically from ( P1, V1) to (P2, V2) : P1 V1γ  = P2 V2γ(11.14) Figure11.8 shows the P-V curves of an ideal gas for two adiabatic processes connecting two isotherms. Fig. 11.8 P-V curves for isothermal and adiabatic processes of an ideal gas.We can calculate, as befor e, the work done in an adiabatic change of an ideal gas from the state ( P1, V1, T1) to the state ( P2, V2, T2).          W = P V VV   d 12 ∫ (11.15) From Eq. (11

.We can calculate, as befor e, the work done in an adiabatic change of an ideal gas from the state ( P1, V1, T1) to the state ( P2, V2, T2).          W = P V VV   d 12 ∫ (11.15) From Eq. (11.14), the constant is P1V1γ  or P2V2γ W = P V VP V V 2 2 21 1 11 1  −− −−  γγ γγ γ 1 1  = P V P VR(T T 1 1  −−− −[ ] = γµ γ2 2 1 11 2 ) 1(11.16) As expected, if work is done by the gas in an adiabatic process ( W > 0), from Eq. (11.16), T2 < T1.  On the other hand, if work is done on the gas ( W < 0), we get T2 > T1 i.e., the temperature of the gas rises. 11.8.4 Isochoric process In an isochoric process, V is constant. No work is done on or by the gas.  From Eq. (11.1), the heat absorbed by the gas goes entirely to change its internal energy and its temperature. The change in temperature for a given amount of heat is determined by the specific heat of the gas at constant volume. 11.8.5 Isobaric process In an isobaric pr ocess, P is fixed. W ork done by the gas is W = P (V2 – V1)  =  µ R (T2 – T1)    (11

. 11.8.5 Isobaric process In an isobaric pr ocess, P is fixed. W ork done by the gas is W = P (V2 – V1)  =  µ R (T2 – T1)    (11 .17) Since temperature changes, so does internal energy. The heat absorbed goes partly to increase internal energy and partly to do work. The change in temperature for a given amount of heat is determined by the specific heat of the gas at constant pressure. 11.8.6 Cyclic process In a cyclic process, the system returns to its initial state. Since internal energy is a state variable, ∆U = 0 for a cyclic process. From 2024-25  PHYSICS 236 Eq. (11.1), the total heat absorbed equals the work done by the system. 11.9  SECOND LAW OF  THERMODYNAMICS The First Law of Thermodynamics is the principle of conse rvation of energy.  Common experience shows that there are many conceivable processes that are perfectly allowed by the First Law and yet are never observed.  For example, nobody has ever seen a book lying on a table jumping to a height by itself

.  For example, nobody has ever seen a book lying on a table jumping to a height by itself.  But such a thing would be possible if the principle of conservation of energy were the only restriction. The table could cool spontaneously, converting some of its internal energy into an equal amount of mechanical energy of the book, which would then hop to a height with potential energy equal to the mechanical energy it acquired.  But this never happens. Clearly, some additional basic principle of nature forbids the above, even though it satisfies the energy conservation principle.  This principle, which  disallows many phenomena consistent with the First Law of Thermodynamics is known as the Second Law of Thermodynamics. The Second Law of Thermodynamics gives a fundamental limitation to the efficiency of a heat engine and the co-efficient of performance of a r efrigerator . In simple ter ms, it says that efficiency of a heat engine can never be unity

. In simple ter ms, it says that efficiency of a heat engine can never be unity. For a r efrigerator , the Second Law says that the co-efficient of performance can never be infinite.  The following two statements, one due to Kelvin and Planck denying the possibility of a perfect heat engine, and another due to Clausius denying the possibility of a perfect refrigerator or heat pump, are a concise summary of these observations. Kelvin-Planck statement No process is possible whose sole result is the absorption of heat from a reservoir and the complete conversion of the heat into work. Clausius statement No process is possible whose sole result is the transfer of heat from a colder object to a hotter object. It can be proved that the two statements above are completely equivalent.11.10  REVERSIBLE AND IRREVERSIBLE PROCESSES Imagine some process in which a thermodynamic system goes from an initial state i to a final state f

.11.10  REVERSIBLE AND IRREVERSIBLE PROCESSES Imagine some process in which a thermodynamic system goes from an initial state i to a final state f. During the process the system absorbs heat Q from the surroundings and performs work W on it. Can we reverse this process and bring both the system and surroundings to their initial states with no other effect anywhere ? Experience suggests that for most processes in nature this is not possible. The spontaneous processes of nature are irreversible. Several examples can be cited. The base of a vessel on an oven is hotter than its other parts. When the vessel is removed, heat is transferred from the base to the other parts, bringing the vessel to a uniform temperature (which in due course cools to the temperature of the surroundings). The process cannot be reversed; a part of the vessel will not get cooler spontaneously and warm up the base. It will violate the Second Law of Thermodynamics, if it did. The free expansion of a gas is irreversible

. It will violate the Second Law of Thermodynamics, if it did. The free expansion of a gas is irreversible. The combustion reaction of a mixture of petrol and air ignited by a spark cannot be reversed. Cooking gas leaking from a gas cylinder in the kitchen diffuses to the entire room. The diffusion process will not spontaneously reverse and bring the gas back to the cylinder . The stirring of a liquid in thermal contact with a reservoir will convert the work done into heat, increasing the internal ener gy of the r eservoir . The pr ocess cannot be reversed exactly; otherwise it would amount to conversion of heat entirely into work, violating the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Irreversibility is a rule rather an exception in nature. Irreversibility arises mainly from two causes: one, many processes (like a free expansion, or an explosive chemical reaction) take the system to non-equilibrium states; two, most processes involve friction, viscosity and other dissipative effects (e.g

.g., a moving body coming to a stop and losing its mechanical energy as heat to the floor and the body; a rotating blade in a liquid coming to a stop due to viscosity and losing its mechanical energy with corresponding gain in the internal energy  of the liquid). Since dissipative effects are present everywhere and can be minimised but not fully eliminated, most processes that we deal with are irreversible. 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 237 A thermodynamic process  (state i → state f ) is reversible if the process can be turned back such that both the system and the surroundings return to their original states, with no other change anywhere else in the universe. From the preceding discussion, a reversible process is an idealised notion. A process is reversible only if it is quasi-static (system in equilibrium with the surroundings at every stage) and there are no dissipative effects

. A process is reversible only if it is quasi-static (system in equilibrium with the surroundings at every stage) and there are no dissipative effects. For example, a quasi-static isothermal expansion of an ideal gas in a cylinder fitted with a frictionless movable piston is a reversible process. Why is reversibility such a basic concept in thermodynamics ?  As we have seen, one of the concerns of thermodynamics is the efficiency with which heat can be converted into work. The Second Law of Thermodynamics rules out the possibility of a perfect heat engine with 100% efficiency. But what is the highest efficiency possible for a heat engine working between two reservoirs at temperatures T1 and T2? It turns out that a heat engine based on idealised reversible processes achieves the highest efficiency possible. All other engines involving irreversibility in any way (as would be the case for practical engines) have lower than this limiting efficiency. 11

. All other engines involving irreversibility in any way (as would be the case for practical engines) have lower than this limiting efficiency. 11.11  CARNOT ENGINE Supp ose we have a hot reservoir at temperature T1 and a cold reservoir at temperature T2.  What is the maximum efficiency possible for a heat engine operating between the two reservoirs and what cycle of proces ses should be adopted to achieve the maximum efficiency ?  Sadi Carnot, a French engineer , first consider ed this question in 1824. Interestingly, Carnot arrived at the correct answer , even though the basic concepts of heat and thermodynamics had yet to be firmly established. We expect the ideal engine operating between two temperatures to be a reversible engine. Irreversibility is associated with dissipative effects, as remarked in the preceding section, and lowers efficiency. A process is reversible if it is quasi-static and non-dissipative

. Irreversibility is associated with dissipative effects, as remarked in the preceding section, and lowers efficiency. A process is reversible if it is quasi-static and non-dissipative.  W e have seen that a process is not quasi-static if it involves finite tem perature difference between the system and the r eservoir .  This implies thatin a reversible heat engine operating between two temperatures, heat should be absorbed (from the hot reservoir) isothermally and released (to the cold r eservoir) isother mally.  W e thus have identified two steps of the reversible heat engine : isothermal process at temperature T1 absorbing heat Q1 from the hot r eservoir , and another isothermal process at temperature T2 releasing heat Q2 to the cold r eservoir . To complete a cycle, we need to take the system from temperature T1 to T2 and then back from temperature T2 to T1

. To complete a cycle, we need to take the system from temperature T1 to T2 and then back from temperature T2 to T1.  Which processes should we employ for this purpose that are reversible? A little reflection shows that we can only adopt reversible adiabatic processes for these purposes, which involve no heat flow from any reservoir . If we employ any other pr ocess that is not adiabatic, say an isochoric process, to take the system fr om one temperatur e to another , we shall need a series of reservoirs in the temperature range T2 to T1 to ensure that at each stage the process is quasi-static.  (Remember again that for a process to be quasi-static and reversible, there should be no finite temperature difference between the system and the r eservoir .) But we are considering a reversible engine that operates between only two temperatures. Thus adiabatic processes must bring about the temperature change in the system from T1 to T2 and T2 to T1 in this engine. Fig. 11

. Thus adiabatic processes must bring about the temperature change in the system from T1 to T2 and T2 to T1 in this engine. Fig. 11.9 Carnot cycle for a heat engine with an ideal gas as  the working substance. A reversible heat engine operating between two temperatur es is called a Car not engine.  W e have just argued that such an engine must have the following seque nce of steps constituting one 2024-25  PHYSICS 238 cycle, called the Carnot cycle, shown in Fig. 11.9. W e have taken the working substance of the Carnot engine t o be an ideal gas. (a)Step 1 → 2Isothermal expansion of the gas taking its  state from ( P1, V1, T1)  to (P2, V2, T1). The heat absorbed by the gas ( Q1) from the reservoir at temperature T1 is given by Eq. (11.12). This is also the work done ( W1 → 2) by the gas on the environment. W1 → 2  =  Q1 = µ R T1  ln V V2 1            (11.18) (b)Step 2 → 3Adiabatic expansion of the gas from ( P2, V2, T1) to (P3, V3, T2) Work done by the gas, using Eq. (11

. W1 → 2  =  Q1 = µ R T1  ln V V2 1            (11.18) (b)Step 2 → 3Adiabatic expansion of the gas from ( P2, V2, T1) to (P3, V3, T2) Work done by the gas, using Eq. (11.16), is WR T T 2 3→=−( ) −    µ1 2 1γ(11.19) (c)Step 3 → 4Isothermal compression of the gas from ( P3, V3, T2) to (P4, V4, T2). Heat released ( Q2) by the gas to the reservoir at temperature T2 is given by Eq. (11.12).  This is also the work done ( W3 → 4) on the gas by the environment. W RTV V3  4→= =  Q2µ23 4ln (11.20) (d)Step 4 → 1Adiabatic compression of the gas from ( P4, V4, T2) to (P1,V1, T1). Work done on the gas, [using Eq.(11.16), is W R T T 4  1→=−   µγ1 2 -1(11.21) From  Eqs. (11.18) to (11.21) total work done by the gas in one complete cycle is W = W1 → 2  + W2 → 3 – W3  → 4 – W4 → 1 = µ RT1  ln V V2 1   – µ RT2  lnV V3 4  (11.22) The efficiency η of the Carnot engine is 12 1 1W Q Q Qη= = −       = −           1T TV V V V2 13 4 2 1In In(11

.22) The efficiency η of the Carnot engine is 12 1 1W Q Q Qη= = −       = −           1T TV V V V2 13 4 2 1In In(11.23) Now since step 2  → 3 is an adiabatic process, T  V T  V1 2 2 3γ γ − − =1 1 i.e.V V=  T T2 32 1    −1 1 /( )γ (11.24) Similarly, since step 4 → 1 is an adiabatic process T  V T  V2 4 1 1γ γ − − =1 1 i.e.V V= T T1 42 1  −1 1 /γ (11.25) From Eqs. (11.24) and (11.25), V V= V V3 42 1    (11.26) Using Eq. (11.26) in Eq. (11.23), we get η =   1−T T2 1  (Carnot engine) (11.27) We have alr eady seen that a Car not engine is a reversible engine. Indeed it is the only reversible engine possible that works between two reservoirs at different temperatures.  Each step of the Carnot cycle given in Fig. 11.9 can be reversed. This will amount to taking heat Q2 from the cold reservoir at T2, doing work W on the system, and transferring heat Q1 to the hot reservoir . This will be a r eversible r efrigerator

. This will amount to taking heat Q2 from the cold reservoir at T2, doing work W on the system, and transferring heat Q1 to the hot reservoir . This will be a r eversible r efrigerator . We next establish the important r esult (sometimes called Carnot’s theorem) that (a) working between two given temperatures T1 and T2 of the hot and cold reservoirs respectively, no engine can have efficiency more than that of the Carnot engine and (b) the efficiency of the Carnot engine is independent of the nature of the working substance. 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 239 To prove the result (a), imagine a reversible (Carnot) engine R and an irreversible engine I working between the same source (hot reservoir) and sink (cold reservoir). Let us couple the engines, I and R, in such a way so that I acts like a heat engine and R acts as a r efrigerator . Let I absorb heat Q1 from the source, deliver work W ′ and release the heat Q1- W′  to the sink

. Let I absorb heat Q1 from the source, deliver work W ′ and release the heat Q1- W′  to the sink. We arrange so that R returns the same heat Q1 to the source, taking heat Q2 from the sink and requiring work W = Q1 – Q2 to be done on it. Now suppose ηR < ηI i.e. if R were to act as an engine it would give less work outputreservoir and delivers the same amount of  work in one cycle, without any change in the source or anywhere else. This is clearly against the Kelvin-Planck statement of the Second Law of Thermodynamics.  Hence the assertion ηI > ηR is wrong.  No engine can have efficiency greater than that of the Carnot engine. A similar argument can be constructed to show that a reversible engine with one particular substance cannot be more efficient than the one using another substance. The maximum efficiency of a Carnot engine given by Eq. (11.27) is independent of the nature of the system performing the Carnot cycle of operations

. The maximum efficiency of a Carnot engine given by Eq. (11.27) is independent of the nature of the system performing the Carnot cycle of operations. Thus we are justified in using an ideal gas as a system in the calculation of efficiency η of a Carnot engine. The ideal gas has a simple equation of state, which allows us to readily calculate η, but the final result for η, [Eq. (11.27)], is true for any Carnot engine. This final remark shows that in a Carnot cycle, 21 21 TT= QQ (11.28) is a universal relation independent of  the nature of the system.  Here Q1 and Q2 are respectively, the heat absorbed and released isothermally (from the hot and to the cold reservoirs) in a Carnot engine. Equation (11.28), can, therefore, be used as a relation to define a truly universal thermodynamic temperature scale that is independent of any particular properties of the system used in the Carnot cycle

.28), can, therefore, be used as a relation to define a truly universal thermodynamic temperature scale that is independent of any particular properties of the system used in the Carnot cycle.  Of course, for an ideal gas as a working substance, this universal temperature is the same as the ideal gas temperature introduced in section 11.9.I R W Fig. 11.10 An irreversible engine (I) coupled to a reversible refrigerator (R). If W ′ > W, this would amount to extraction of heat W′ – W from the sink and its full conversion to work, in contradiction with the Secon d Law of Thermodynamics. than that of I i.e. W < W′ for a given Q1. With R acting like a r efrigerator , this would mean Q2 =  Q1 – W >  Q1 – W ′. Thus, on the  whole, the coupled I-R system extracts heat (Q1 – W) – (Q1 – W ′) = (W ′ – W) from the cold SUMMARY 1.The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that ‘ two systems in thermal equilibrium with a third system separately are in thermal equilibrium with each other ’

.The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that ‘ two systems in thermal equilibrium with a third system separately are in thermal equilibrium with each other ’.  The Zeroth Law leads to the concept of temperature. 2.Internal energy of a system is the sum of kinetic energies and potential energies of the molecular constituents of the system. It does not include the over -all kinetic ener gy of the system. Heat and work are two modes of energy transfer to the system.  Heat is the energy transfer arising due to temperature difference between the system and the surroundings. W ork is ener gy transfer br ought about by other means, such as moving the piston of a cylinder containing the gas, by raising or lowering some weight connected to it. 2024-25  PHYSICS 240 3.The first law of thermodynamics is the general law of conservation of energy applied to any system in which energy transfer from or to the surroundings (through heat and work) is taken into account

.The first law of thermodynamics is the general law of conservation of energy applied to any system in which energy transfer from or to the surroundings (through heat and work) is taken into account.  It states that ∆Q  = ∆U  +  ∆W where ∆Q is the heat supplied to the system, ∆W is the work done by the system and ∆U is the change in internal energy of the system. 4.The specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by smQ T=1∆ ∆ where m is the mass of the substance and ∆Q is the heat required to change its temperature by ∆T.  The molar specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by 1QCTµ∆=∆ where µ is the number  of moles of the substance. For a solid, the law of equipartition of energy gives C  =  3 R which generally agrees with experiment at ordinary temperatures. Calorie is the old unit of heat. 1 calorie is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 g of water from 14.5 °C to 15.5 °C.  1 cal  =  4.186 J. 5

. Calorie is the old unit of heat. 1 calorie is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 g of water from 14.5 °C to 15.5 °C.  1 cal  =  4.186 J. 5.For an ideal gas, the molar specific heat capacities at constant pressure and volume satisfy the relation Cp – Cv  = R where R is the universal gas constant. 6.Equilibrium states of a thermodynamic system are described by state variables. The value of a state variable depends only on the particular state, not on the path used to arrive at that state.  Examples of state variables are pressure ( P), volume ( V), temperature (T), and mass ( m).  Heat and work are not state variables.  An Equation of State (like the ideal gas equation PV  =  µ RT) is a r elation connecting dif ferent state variables. 7.A quasi-static process is an infinitely slow process such that the system remains in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the surroundings throughout

. 7.A quasi-static process is an infinitely slow process such that the system remains in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the surroundings throughout. In a quasi-static process, the pressure and temperature of the environment can differ from those of the system only infinitesimally. 8.In an isothermal expansion of an ideal gas from volume V1 to V2 at temperature T the heat absorbed ( Q) equals the work done ( W) by the gas, each given by Q  =  W  =   µ R T   ln     12 VV 9.In an adiabatic process of an ideal gas PVγ  =  constant wherep vC Cγ= Work done by an ideal gas in an adiabatic change of state fr om (P1, V1, T1) to (P2, V2, T2) is ()   – 11 2 R T TWµ γ−= 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 241 10.The second law of thermodynamics disallows some processes consistent with the First Law of Thermodynamics. It states Kelvin-Planck statement No process is possible whose sole result is the absorption of heat from a reservoir and complete conversion of the heat into work

. It states Kelvin-Planck statement No process is possible whose sole result is the absorption of heat from a reservoir and complete conversion of the heat into work. Clausius statement No process is possible whose sole result is the transfer of heat from a colder object to a hotter object. Put simply, the Second Law implies that no heat engine can have efficiency η equal to 1 or no refrigerator can have co-efficient of performance α equal to infinity. 11.A process is reversible if it can be reversed such that both the system and the surroundings return to their original states, with no other change anywhere else in the universe. Spontaneous processes of nature are irreversible. The idealised reversible process is a quasi-static process with no dissipative factors such as friction, viscosity, etc. 12.Carnot engine is a reversible engine operating between two temperatures T1 (source) and T2 (sink). The Carnot cycle consists of two isothermal processes connected by two adiabatic processes

. 12.Carnot engine is a reversible engine operating between two temperatures T1 (source) and T2 (sink). The Carnot cycle consists of two isothermal processes connected by two adiabatic processes. The efficiency of a Carnot engine is given by 12 TT     1− =  η(Carnot engine) No engine operating between two temperatures can have efficiency greater than that of the Carnot engine. 13.If Q > 0, heat is added to the system If Q < 0, heat is removed to the system If W > 0, Work is done by the system If W < 0, W ork is done on the system Quantity Symbol Dimensions Unit Remark Co-efficienty of volume αv[K–1] K–1αv = 3 α1 expansion Heat supplied to a system ∆Q [ML2 T–2] J Q is not a state variable Specific heat capacity s [L2 T–2 K–1] J kg–1 K–1 Thermal Conductivity K [MLT–3 K–1] J s–1 K–1H = – KA d dt x POINTS TO PONDER 1.Temperature of a body is related to its average internal energy, not to the kinetic energy of motion of its centre of mass

.Temperature of a body is related to its average internal energy, not to the kinetic energy of motion of its centre of mass. A bullet fired from a gun is not at a higher temperature because of its high speed. 2.Equilibrium in thermodynamics refers to the situation when macroscopic variables describing the thermodynamic state of a system do not depend on time.  Equilibrium of a system in mechanics means the net external force and torque on the system are zero. 2024-25  PHYSICS 242 3.In a state of thermodynamic equilibrium, the microscopic constituents of a system are not in equilibrium (in the sense of mechanics). 4.Heat capacity, in general, depends on the process the system goes through when heat is supplied. 5.In isothermal quasi-static processes, heat is absorbed or given out by the system even though at every stage the gas has the same temperature as that of the surrounding reservoir .  This is possible because of the infinitesimal dif ference in temperatur e between the system and the r eservoir

.  This is possible because of the infinitesimal dif ference in temperatur e between the system and the r eservoir . EXERCISES 11.1 A geyser heats water flowing at the rate of 3.0 litres per minute from 27 °C to 77 °C. If the geyser operates on a gas bur ner, what is the rate of consumption of the fuel if its heat of combustion is 4.0 × 104 J/g ? 11.2 What amount of heat must be supplied to 2.0 ×  10–2 kg of nitrogen (at room temperature) to raise its temperature by 45 °C at constant pressure ? (Molecular mass of N2 = 28; R = 8.3 J mol–1 K–1.) 11.3 Explain why (a)Two bodies at different temperatures T1 and T2 if brought in thermal contact do not necessarily settle to the mean temperature ( T1 + T2 )/2. (b)The coolant in a chemical or a nuclear plant (i.e., the liquid used to prevent the different parts of a plant from getting too hot) should have high specific heat. (c)Air pressure in a car tyre increases during driving

.e., the liquid used to prevent the different parts of a plant from getting too hot) should have high specific heat. (c)Air pressure in a car tyre increases during driving. (d)The climate of a harbour town is more temperate than that of a town in a desert at the same latitude. 11.4 A cylinder with a movable piston contains 3 moles of hydrogen at standard temperature and pr essur e. The walls of the cylinder ar e made of a heat insulator , and the piston is insulated by having a pile of sand on it. By what factor does the pressure of the gas increase if the gas is compressed to half its original volume ? 11.5 In changing the state of a gas adiabatically from an equilibrium state A to another equilibrium state B, an amount of work equal to 22.3 J is done on the system. If the gas is taken from state A to B via a process in which the net heat absorbed by the system is 9.35 cal, how much is the net work done by the system in the latter case ? (Take 1 cal = 4.19 J) 11

.35 cal, how much is the net work done by the system in the latter case ? (Take 1 cal = 4.19 J) 11.6 Two cylinders A and B of equal capacity are connected to each other via a stopcock. A contains a gas at standard temperature and pressure. B is completely evacuated. The entire system is thermally insulated. The stopcock is suddenly opened. Answer the following : (a)What is the final pressure of the gas in A and B ? (b)What is the change in internal energy of the gas ? (c)What is the change in the temperature of the gas ? (d)Do the intermediate states of the system (before settling to the final equilibrium state) lie on its P-V-T  surface ? 11.7An electric heater supplies heat to a system at a rate of 100W. If system performs work at a rate of 75 joules per second. At what rate is the internal energy increasing? 2024-25  THERMODYNAMICS 243 11.8 A thermodynamic system is taken from an original state to an intermediate state by the linear process shown in Fig. (11.13) Fig. 11

.8 A thermodynamic system is taken from an original state to an intermediate state by the linear process shown in Fig. (11.13) Fig. 11.11 Its volume is then reduced to the original value from E to F by an isobaric process. Calculate the total work done by the gas from D to E to F 2024-25  CHAPTER  TWELVE KINETIC THEORY 12.1 INTRODUCTION Boyle discovered the law named after him in 1661. Boyle, Newton and several others tried to explain the behaviour of gases by considering that gases ar e made up of tiny atomic particles. The actual atomic theory got established mor e than 150 years later . Kinetic theory explains the behaviour of gases based on the idea that the gas  consists of rapidly moving atoms or molecules. This is possible as the inter -atomic for ces, which are short range for ces that ar e important for solids and liquids,  can be neglected for gases. The kinetic theory was developed in the nineteenth century by Maxwell, Boltzmann and others. It has been r emarkably successful

. The kinetic theory was developed in the nineteenth century by Maxwell, Boltzmann and others. It has been r emarkably successful. It gives a molecular interpr etation of  pr essur e and temperatur e of a gas, and is consistent with gas laws and A vogadr o’s hypothesis. It corr ectly explains specific heat capacities of many gases. It also r elates measurable pr operties of gases such as viscosity, conduction and dif fusion with molecular parameters, yielding estimates of molecular sizes and masses. This chapter gives an introduction to kinetic theory. 12.2 MOLECULAR NATURE OF MATTER Richard Feynman, one of the great physicists of 20th century considers the discovery that “Matter is made up of atoms” to be a very significant one. Humanity may suf fer annihilation (due to nuclear catastr ophe) or extinction (due to envir onmental disasters) if we do not act wisely

. Humanity may suf fer annihilation (due to nuclear catastr ophe) or extinction (due to envir onmental disasters) if we do not act wisely. If that happens, and all of scientific knowledge wer e to be destr oyed then Feynman would like the ‘Atomic Hypothesis’ to be communicated to the next generation of cr eatur es in the universe. Atomic Hypothesis: All things ar e made of atoms - little particles that move ar ound in perpetual motion, attracting each other when they ar e a little distance apart, but repelling upon being squeezed into one another . Speculation that matter may not be continuous, existed in many places and cultur es. Kanada in India and Democritus12.1 Introduction 12.2 Molecular nature of matter 12.3 Behaviour of gases 12.4 Kinetic theory of an ideal gas 12.5 Law of equipartition of energy 12.6 Specific heat capacity 12.7 Mean free path Summary Points to ponder Exercises 2024-25  KINETIC THEORY 245 in Greece had suggested that matter may consist of indivisible constituents

.6 Specific heat capacity 12.7 Mean free path Summary Points to ponder Exercises 2024-25  KINETIC THEORY 245 in Greece had suggested that matter may consist of indivisible constituents. The scientific ‘Atomic Theory’  is usually cr edited to John Dalton. He proposed the atomic  theory to explain the laws of definite and multiple pr oportions obeyed by elements when they combine into compounds. The first law says that any given compound has, a fixed pr oportion by mass of its constituents. The second law says that when two elements form mor e than one compound, for a fixed mass of one element, the masses of the other elements are in ratio of small integers. To explain the laws Dalton suggested, about 200 years ago,  that the smallest constituents of an element are atoms. Atoms of one element are identical but dif fer fr om those of other elements.  A small number of atoms of each element combine to for m a molecule of the compound

. Atoms of one element are identical but dif fer fr om those of other elements.  A small number of atoms of each element combine to for m a molecule of the compound. Gay Lussac’s law, also given in early 19th century, states:  When gases combine chemically to yield another gas, their volumes are in the ratios of small integers.  A vogadr o’s law  (or hypothesis) says: Equal volumes of all gases at equal temperatur e and pressur e have the same number of molecules.  A vogadr o’s law, when combined with Dalton’s theory explains Gay  Lussac’s law.  Since the elements ar e often in the for m of molecules, Dalton’s atomic theory can also be r eferred to as the molecular theoryof matter . The theory is now well accepted by scientists. However even at the end of the nineteenth century ther e wer e famous scientists who did not believe in atomic theory ! From many observations, in r ecent times we now know that  molecules (made up of one or more atoms) constitute matter

. Electr on micr oscopes  and scanning tunnelling microscopes enable us to even see them. The size of an atom is about an angstr om (10 -10   m). In solids, which ar e tightly packed, atoms ar e spaced about a few  angstr oms (2 Å) apart. In liquids the separation between atoms is also about the same.  In liquids the atoms  ar e not as rigidly fixed as in solids, and can move around. This enables a liquid to flow.  In gases the interatomic distances ar e in tens of angstroms.  The average distance a molecule can travel without colliding is called the  mean free path. The mean free path, in gases, is of the or der of thousands of angstr oms. The atoms are much fr eer in gases and can travel long distances without colliding. If they ar e not enclosed, gases disperse away. In solids and liquids the closeness makes the interatomic for ce important. The for ce has a long range attraction and a short range r epulsion. The atoms attract when they ar e at a few angstr oms but r epel when they come closer

. The for ce has a long range attraction and a short range r epulsion. The atoms attract when they ar e at a few angstr oms but r epel when they come closer . The static appearance of a gasAtomic Hypothesis in Ancient India and Greece Though John Dalton is cr edited with the intr oduction of atomic viewpoint in moder n science, scholars in ancient India and Gr eece conjectur ed long befor e the existence of atoms and molecules.  In the V aiseshika school of thought in India founded by Kanada ( Sixth century B.C.) the atomic pictur e was developed in considerable detail. Atoms wer e thought to be eter nal, indivisible, infinitesimal and ultimate parts of matter . It was ar gued that if matter could be subdivided without an end, ther e would be no dif ference between a mustar d seed and the Meru mountain

. It was ar gued that if matter could be subdivided without an end, ther e would be no dif ference between a mustar d seed and the Meru mountain.  The four kinds of atoms ( Paramanu  — Sanskrit wor d for the smallest particle) postulated were Bhoomi (Earth), Ap (water), Tejas (fire) and V ayu (air) that have characteristic mass and other attributes, wer e propounded. Akasa (space) was thought to have no atomic structur e and was continuous and inert. Atoms combine to for m dif ferent molecules (e.g. two atoms combine to for m a diatomic molecule dvyanuka, thr ee atoms for m a tryanuka or a triatomic molecule), their pr operties depending upon the natur e and ratio of the constituent atoms.  The size of the atoms was also estimated, by conjectur e or by methods that ar e not known to us.  The estimates vary. In Lalitavistara, a famous biography of the Buddha written mainly in the second century B.C., the estimate is close to the moder n estimate of atomic size, of the or der of 1 0–10 m

. In Lalitavistara, a famous biography of the Buddha written mainly in the second century B.C., the estimate is close to the moder n estimate of atomic size, of the or der of 1 0–10 m.    In ancient Gr eece, Democritus (Fourth century B.C.) is best known for his atomic hypothesis. The word ‘atom’ means ‘indivisible’ in Gr eek. Accor ding to him, atoms dif fer fr om each other physically, in shape, size and other pr operties and this r esulted in the dif ferent pr operties of the substances for med by their combination.  The atoms of water wer e smooth and r ound and unable to ‘hook’ on to each other , which is why liquid /water flows easily.   The atoms of earth wer e rough and jagged, so they held together to for m hard substances.  The atoms of fir e wer e thor ny which is why it caused painful bur ns

.   The atoms of earth wer e rough and jagged, so they held together to for m hard substances.  The atoms of fir e wer e thor ny which is why it caused painful bur ns. These fascinating ideas, despite their ingenuity, could not evolve much further , perhaps because they were intuitive conjectures and speculations not tested and modified by quantitative experiments - the hallmark of moder n science. 2024-25  246 PHYSICS( )–1 –1J mol KpV Tµis misleading. The gas is full of activity and the equilibrium is a dynamic one. In dynamic equilibrium, molecules collide and change their speeds during the collision. Only the average properties ar e constant. Atomic theory is not the end of our quest, but the beginning. W e now know that atoms ar e not indivisible or elementary. They consist of a nucleus and electr ons. The nucleus itself is made up of protons and neutr ons. The pr otons and neutr ons ar e again made up of quarks. Even quarks may not be the end of the story. Ther e may be string like elementary entities

. The pr otons and neutr ons ar e again made up of quarks. Even quarks may not be the end of the story. Ther e may be string like elementary entities. Natur e always has surprises for us, but the sear ch for truth is often enjoyable and the discoveries beautiful. In this chapter , we shall limit ourselves to understanding the behaviour of gases (and a little bit of solids), as a collection of moving molecules in incessant motion. 12.3   BEHAVIOUR OF GASES Properties of gases are easier to understand than those of solids and liquids. This is mainly because in a gas, molecules ar e far fr om each other and their mutual interactions ar e negligible except when two molecules collide. Gases at low pr essur es and high temperatur es much above that at which they liquefy (or solidify) appr oximately satisfy a simple r elation between their pr essur e, temperatur e and volume given by (see Chapter 10) PV = KT (12.1) for a given sample of the gas. Here T is the temperature in kelvin or (absolute)  scale

.1) for a given sample of the gas. Here T is the temperature in kelvin or (absolute)  scale. K  is  a constant for the given sample but varies with the volume of the gas. If we now  bring in  the idea of atoms or molecules, then K is proportional to the number of molecules, (say) N in the sample. W e can write K = N k . Observation tells us that this k is same for all gases. It is called Boltzmann constant and is denoted by k B. As 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2P V P V N T N T=  = constant = kB(12.2) if P, V and T are same, then N is also same for all gases. This is Avogadro’s hypothesis, that  the number of molecules per unit volume is the same for all gases at a fixed temperature and pressure. The number in 22.4 litres of any gasis 6.02 × 1023. This is known as Avogadro number and is denoted by NA. The mass of 22.4 litres of any gas is equal to its molecular weight in grams at S.T.P (standard temperature 273 K and pressure 1 atm). This amount of substance is called a mole (see Chapter 1 for a more precise definition)

.T.P (standard temperature 273 K and pressure 1 atm). This amount of substance is called a mole (see Chapter 1 for a more precise definition). Avogadro had guessed the equality of numbers in equal volumes of gas at a fixed temperature and pressure from chemical reactions.  Kinetic  theory justifies this hypothesis. The perfect gas equation can be written as PV = µ RT (12.3) where  µ   is the number of moles and R  = NA kB is a universal constant. The temperatur e T is absolute temperature.  Choosing kelvin scale for absolute temperature, R = 8.314 J mol–1K–1. Here 0 AM N M Nµ= = (12.4) where M is the mass of the gas containing N molecules, M0 is the molar mass and NA the Avogadr o’s number . Using  Eqs. (12.4) and (12.3) can also be written as PV = kB NT or P = kB nT P (atm) Fig.12.1 Real gases approach ideal gas behaviour at low pressures and high temperatures. where  n is the number density, i.e. number of molecules per unit volume. kB is  the Boltzmann constant introduced above. Its value in SI units is 1

. where  n is the number density, i.e. number of molecules per unit volume. kB is  the Boltzmann constant introduced above. Its value in SI units is 1.38 ×  10–23 J K–1. Another useful form of Eq. (12.3) is 0RTPMρ=(12.5) 2024-25  KINETIC THEORY 247⊳where ρ is the mass density of the gas. A gas that satisfies Eq. (12.3) exactly at all pressur es and temperatur es is defined to be an ideal gas . An ideal gas is a simple theor etical model of a gas. No r eal gas is truly ideal. Fig. 12.1 shows departures from ideal gas behaviour for a r eal gas at thr ee dif ferent temperatures. Notice that all curves appr oach the ideal gas behaviour for low  pr essur es and high temperatur es. At low pressur es or high temperatur es the molecules ar e far apart and molecular interactions ar e negligible. W ithout interactions the gas behaves like an ideal one. If we fix µ and T in Eq. (12.3), we get PV = constant (12.6) i.e., keeping temperature constant, pressure of a given mass of gas varies inversely with volume

. If we fix µ and T in Eq. (12.3), we get PV = constant (12.6) i.e., keeping temperature constant, pressure of a given mass of gas varies inversely with volume. This is the famous Boyle’s law . Fig. 12.2  shows comparison between experimental P-V curves and the theor etical curves predicted by Boyle’s law. Once again you see that the  agr eement is good at high temperatur es and  low pr essur es. Next, if you fix P, Eq. (12.1) shows that V ∝  T i.e., for a fixed pressure, the volume of a gas is proportional to its absolute temperatur e T (Charles’ law) . See Fig. 12.3. Fig.12.2 Experimental P-V curves (solid lines) for steam at three temperatures compared with Boyle’s law (dotted lines). P is in units of 22 atm and V in units of 0.09 litres. Finally, consider a mixtur e of non-interacting ideal  gases: µ 1  moles of gas 1, µ 2 moles of gas 2,etc. in a vessel of volume V at temperature T and pressur e P. It is then found that the equation  of state of the mixture is : PV = ( µ1 + µ2 +…  ) RT (12.7) i.e. 1 2 ..

. in a vessel of volume V at temperature T and pressur e P. It is then found that the equation  of state of the mixture is : PV = ( µ1 + µ2 +…  ) RT (12.7) i.e. 1 2 ...RT RTPV Vµ µ= + + (12.8) = P1 + P2 + … (12.9) Clearly P1 =    µ1 R T/V    is the pressur e that gas 1 would  exert at the same conditions of volume and  temperature if no other gases were present. This is called the partial pressure of the gas. Thus, the total pressure of a mixture of ideal gases is the sum of partial pr essur es. T his is Dalton’s law of partial pressures. Fig. 12 .3Experimental T-V curves (solid lines) for CO2 at three pressures compared with Charles’ law (dotted lines). T is in units of 300 K and V in units of 0.13 litres. We next consider some examples which give us infor mation about the volume occupied by the molecules and the volume of a single molecule. Example 12.1  The density of water is  1000 kg m–3. The density of water vapour at 100 °C and 1 atm pr essur e is 0.6 kg m–3

. Example 12.1  The density of water is  1000 kg m–3. The density of water vapour at 100 °C and 1 atm pr essur e is 0.6 kg m–3. The volume of a molecule multiplied by the total number gives ,what is called, molecular volume. Estimate the ratio (or fraction) of the molecular volume  to the total volume occupied by the water vapour under the above conditions of temperatur e and pressur e. 2024-25  248 PHYSICS⊳ ⊳Answer  For  a given mass of water molecules, the density is less if volume is large. So the volume of the vapour is  1000/0.6  = 1/(6 × 10 -4 ) times lar ger.  If densities of bulk water and water molecules are same, then the fraction of molecular volume to the total volume in liquid state is 1. As volume in vapour state has increased, the fractional volume is less by the same amount, i.e.  6× 10-4.  ⊳ Example 12.2   Estimate the volume of a water molecule using the data in Example 12.1. Answer  In the liquid (or solid) phase, the molecules of water ar e quite closely packed

.e.  6× 10-4.  ⊳ Example 12.2   Estimate the volume of a water molecule using the data in Example 12.1. Answer  In the liquid (or solid) phase, the molecules of water ar e quite closely packed. The density of water molecule may therefore, be regarded as roughly equal to the density of bulk water = 1000 kg m–3. To estimate the volume of a water molecule, we need to know the mass of a single water molecule. W e know that 1 mole of water has a mass appr oximately equal to (2 + 16)g  = 18 g  =  0.018 kg. Since 1 mole   contains  about   6 × 1023 molecules   (A vogadr o’s  number),   the mass of a molecule of water is  (0.018)/(6 × 1023) kg  = 3 × 10–26 kg. Therefore, a rough estimate of the volume of a water  molecule is as follows : Volume of a water molecule = (3 × 10–26 kg)/ (1000 kg m–3) = 3 × 10–29 m3 = (4/3) π  (Radius)3 Hence, Radius ≈ 2 ×10-10  m = 2 Å ⊳ Example 12.3    What is the average distance between atoms (interatomic distance) in water? Use the data given in Examples 12.1 and 12.2

.3    What is the average distance between atoms (interatomic distance) in water? Use the data given in Examples 12.1 and 12.2. Answer  :   A given mass of water in vapour state has 1.67×103 times the volume of the same mass of water in liquid state (Ex. 12.1). This is also the increase in the amount of volume available for each molecule of water . When volume increases by 103 times the radius increases by V1/3 or 10 times, i.e., 10 × 2 Å  = 20 Å. So the average distance is 2 × 20 = 40  Å.    ⊳ Example 12.4 A vessel contains two non- reactive gases : neon (monatomic) and oxygen (diatomic). The ratio of their partial pressures is 3:2. Estimate the ratio of  (i)number of molecules and (ii) mass density of neon and oxygen in the vessel. Atomic mass of Ne = 20.2 u, molecular mass of O2 = 32.0 u. Answer  Partial pr essur e of a gas in a mixtur e is the pr essur e it would have for the same volume and temperatur e if it alone occupied the vessel

.2 u, molecular mass of O2 = 32.0 u. Answer  Partial pr essur e of a gas in a mixtur e is the pr essur e it would have for the same volume and temperatur e if it alone occupied the vessel. (The total pr essur e of a mixtur e of non-r eactive gases is the sum of partial pr essur es due to its constituent gases.) Each gas (assumed ideal) obeys the gas law. Since V  and T are common to the two gases,  we  have  P1V = µ 1 RT and P2V = µ2 RT, i.e. ( P1/P2) = (µ1 / µ2). Her e 1 and 2 refer to neon and oxygen r espectively. Since ( P1/P2) = (3/2) (given), ( µ1/ µ2) = 3/2. (i)By definition µ1 = (N1/NA ) and µ2 = (N2/NA) where N1 and N2 are the number of molecules of 1 and 2, and NA is the A vogadr o’s number . Therefore, (N1/N2) = (µ1 / µ2)  = 3/2. (ii)We can also write µ1 = (m1/M1) and µ2 = (m2/M2) wher e m1 and m2 are the masses of 1 and 2; and M1 and M2 are their molecular masses. (Both m1 and M1; as well as m2 and M2 should be expr essed in the same units)

. (Both m1 and M1; as well as m2 and M2 should be expr essed in the same units). If ρ1 and ρ2  are the mass densities of 1 and 2 respectively,  we have ρ ρµ µ1 21 21 21 21 2= = = ×  m V m Vm mM M/ / 3 20.20.9472 32.0= × =   ⊳ 12.4 KINETIC THEORY OF AN IDEAL GAS Kinetic theory of gases is based on the molecular pictur e of matter . A given amount of gas is a collection of a lar ge number of molecules (typically of the or der of A vogadr o’s number) that are in incessant random motion. At or dinary pressur e and temperatur e, the average distance between molecules is a factor of 10 or mor e than the typical size of a molecule (2 Å). Thus, interaction between molecules is negligible and we can assume that they move freely in straight lines accor ding to Newton’s first law. However , occasionally, they come close to each other , experience intermolecular forces and their velocities change.  These interactions are called collisions

. However , occasionally, they come close to each other , experience intermolecular forces and their velocities change.  These interactions are called collisions. The molecules collide incessantly against each other or with the walls and change ⊳ 2024-25  KINETIC THEORY 249 their velocities.  The collisions are considered to be elastic. W e can derive an expr ession for the pressure of a gas based on the kinetic theory. We begin with the idea that molecules of a gas ar e in incessant random motion, colliding against one another and with the walls of the container . All collisions between molecules among themselves or between molecules and the walls ar e elastic. This implies that  total kinetic energy is conserved. The total momentum is conserved as usual. 12.4.1 Pressure of an Ideal Gas Consider a gas enclosed in a cube of side l. T ake the axes to be parallel to the sides of the cube, as shown in Fig. 12.4.  A molecule with velocity (vx, vy, vz ) hits the planar wall parallel to yz- plane of ar ea A (= l2)

. T ake the axes to be parallel to the sides of the cube, as shown in Fig. 12.4.  A molecule with velocity (vx, vy, vz ) hits the planar wall parallel to yz- plane of ar ea A (= l2). Since the collision is elastic, the molecule r ebounds with the same velocity; its y and z components of velocity do not change in the collision but the x-component r everses sign. That is, the velocity after collision is (-vx, vy, vz ) . The change in momentum of the molecule is:  – mvx – (mvx) = – 2 mvx . By the principle of conservation of momentum, the momentum imparted to the wall in the collision = 2mvx .the wall. Thus, the number of molecules with velocity (vx, vy, vz )  hitting the wall in time ∆t is ½A vx  ∆t n, where n is the number of molecules per unit volume. The total momentum transferred to the wall by these molecules in time ∆t  is: Q = (2mvx) (½ n A vx ∆t ) (12.10) The force on the wall is the rate of momentum transfer Q/ ∆t  and pr essur e is for ce per unit area : P =  Q /(A ∆t)  =  n m vx2(12

.10) The force on the wall is the rate of momentum transfer Q/ ∆t  and pr essur e is for ce per unit area : P =  Q /(A ∆t)  =  n m vx2(12.11) Actually, all molecules in a gas do not have the same velocity; ther e is a distribution in velocities.  The  above equation, therefore, stands for pressure du e to the group of molecules with speed vx  in  the x-direction and n stands for the number density of that group of molecules. The total  pressure is obtained by summing over the contribution due to all gr oups: P = n m  2 xv (12.12) where2 xv is the average of  vx2  .  Now the gas is isotr opic, i.e. ther e is no pr eferred dir ection of velocity of the molecules in the vessel. Therefore, by symmetry, 2 xv = 2 yv = 2 zv = (1/3) [2 xv +  2 yv + 2 zv] = (1/3) 2v (12.13) where v is the speed and 2v  denotes the mean of the squar ed speed. Thus P = (1/3) n m  2v (12.14) Some remarks on this derivation. First, though we choose the container to be a cube, the shape of the vessel really is immaterial

. Thus P = (1/3) n m  2v (12.14) Some remarks on this derivation. First, though we choose the container to be a cube, the shape of the vessel really is immaterial. For a vessel of arbitrary shape, we can always choose a small infinitesimal (planar) area and carry through the steps above. Notice that both A and ∆t do not appear in the final result. By Pascal’s law, given in Ch. 9,  pressure in one portion of the gas  in equilibrium is the same as anywhere else. Second, we have ignored any collisions in the derivation. Though this assumption is difficult to justify rigorously, we can qualitatively see that it will not lead to erroneous results. The number of molecules hitting the wall in time ∆t was found to be ½ n  Avx ∆t. Now the collisions are random and the gas is in a steady state. Thus, if a molecule with velocity ( vx, vy, vz ) acquires a  different velocity due to collision with some molecule, there will always be some otherFig. 12.4 Elastic collision of a gas molecule with the wall of the container

. 12.4 Elastic collision of a gas molecule with the wall of the container . To calculate the force (and pressure) on the wall, we need to calculate momentum imparted to the wall per unit time. In a small time interval ∆t, a molecule with x-component of velocity vx will hit the wall if it is within the distance vx ∆t from the wall. That is, all molecules within the volume Avx ∆t only can hit the wall in time ∆t. But, on the average, half of these are moving towards the wall and the other half away from 2024-25  250 PHYSICS⊳molecule with a different initial velocity which after a collision acquires the velocity  ( vx, vy, vz ). If this were not so, the distribution of velocities would not r emain steady. In any case we ar e finding 2 xv. Thus, on the whole, molecular collisions (if they ar e not too fr equent and the time spent in a collision is  negligible compar ed to time between collisions)  will not af fect the calculation above. 12.4.2  Kinetic Interpretation of Temperature Equation (13

. 12.4.2  Kinetic Interpretation of Temperature Equation (13.14) can be written as PV   =  (1/3) nV m  2v (12.15a) PV   =   (2/3) N x ½ m 2v (12.15b) where N (= nV) is the number of molecules in the sample. The quantity in the bracket is the average translational kinetic ener gy of the molecules in the gas. Since the inter nal ener gy E of an ideal gas is pur ely kinetic *, E = N  × (1/2) m 2v (12.16) Equation (12.15) then gives : PV = (2/3) E (12.17) We are now ready for a kinetic interpr etation of temperature. Combining Eq. (12.17) with the ideal gas Eq. (12.3), we get E = (3/2)  kB  NT                                             (12.18) or  E/ N  = ½   m 2v   =   (3/2) kBT (12.19) i.e., the average kinetic energy of a molecule is proportional to the absolute temperatur e of the gas; it is independent of pr essur e, volume or the natur e of the ideal gas

.19) i.e., the average kinetic energy of a molecule is proportional to the absolute temperatur e of the gas; it is independent of pr essur e, volume or the natur e of the ideal gas. This is a fundamental result relating temperature, a macroscopic measurable parameter of a gas (a ther modynamic variable as it is called) to a molecular quantity, namely the average kinetic energy of a molecule. The two domains are connected by the Boltzmann constant. W e note in passing that Eq. (12.18) tells us that internal ener gy of an ideal gas depends only on temperature, not on pr essur e or volume. W ith this interpr etation of temperatur e, kinetic theory of an ideal gas is completely consistent with the ideal gas equation and the various gas laws based on it. For a mixture of non-reactive ideal gases, the total pressure gets contribution from each gas in the mixture. Equation (12.14) becomesP = (1/3) [ n1m12 1v + n2 m2 2 2v+…  ] (12

. For a mixture of non-reactive ideal gases, the total pressure gets contribution from each gas in the mixture. Equation (12.14) becomesP = (1/3) [ n1m12 1v + n2 m2 2 2v+…  ] (12.20) In equilibrium, the average kinetic energy of the molecules of different gases will be equal. That is, ½  m1 2 1v = ½ m2 2 2v= (3/2) kB T so that P = (n1 + n2 +…  ) kB T (12.21) which is Dalton’s law of partial pressures. From Eq. (12.19), we can get an idea of the typical speed of molecules in a gas. At a temperatur e T = 300 K, the mean squar e speed of a molecule in nitr ogen gas is : 2 –26 26284.65 106.02 10N AMmN= = = ×× kg. 2v  =  3 kB T / m    =    (516)2 m2s-2 The squar e root of 2v is known as r oot mean squar e (rms) speed and is denoted by vrms, ( We can also write    2v    as   < v2 >.) vrms   =    516 m s-1 The speed is of the or der of the speed of sound in air. It follows fr om Eq. (12.19) that at the same temperatur e, lighter molecules have gr eater r ms speed. Example 12

.) vrms   =    516 m s-1 The speed is of the or der of the speed of sound in air. It follows fr om Eq. (12.19) that at the same temperatur e, lighter molecules have gr eater r ms speed. Example 12.5  A flask contains argon and chlorine in the ratio of 2:1 by mass.  The temperatur e of the mixtur e is 27 °C. Obtain the ratio of  (i) average kinetic ener gy per molecule, and (ii) r oot mean squar e speed vrms of the molecules of the two gases. Atomic mass of ar gon = 39.9 u; Molecular mass of chlorine = 70.9 u. Answer The important point to remember is that the average kinetic energy (per molecule) of any (ideal) gas (be it monatomic like argon, diatomic like chlorine or polyatomic) is always equal to (3/2) kBT. It depends only on temperature, and is independent of the nature of the gas. (i)Since argon and chlorine both have the same temperature in the flask, the ratio of average kinetic energy (per molecule) of the two gases is 1:1

. (i)Since argon and chlorine both have the same temperature in the flask, the ratio of average kinetic energy (per molecule) of the two gases is 1:1. (ii)Now  ½ m vrms2  =  average kinetic energy per molecule =  (3/2) ) kBT where m  is the mass *E denotes the translational part of the inter nal ener gy U that may include ener gies due to other degr ees of freedom also. See section 12.5. 2024-25  KINETIC THEORY 251⊳⊳of a molecule of the gas. Therefore, () ( )( ) ()( ) ()2 Cl Cl Ar 2 Ar ArClrms rmsm M m M= =v v= 70.9 39.9 =1.77 where M denotes the molecular mass of the gas. (For argon, a molecule is just an atom of argon.) Taking square root of both sides, () ( )Ar Clrms rmsv v =  1.33 You should note that the composition of the mixtur e by mass is quite irr elevant to the above calculation. Any other proportion by mass of argon and chlorine would give the same answers to (i) and (ii), pr ovided the temperatur e remains unalter ed. ⊳ Example 12.6    Uranium has two isotopes of masses 235 and 238 units

. ⊳ Example 12.6    Uranium has two isotopes of masses 235 and 238 units. If both ar e present in Uranium hexafluoride gas which would have the  lar ger average speed ? If atomic mass of fluorine is 19 units, estimate the per centage dif ference in speeds at any temperatur e. Answer   At a fixed temperature the average energy  = ½ m  <v2 > is constant. So  smaller the mass of the molecule, faster will be the speed. The ratio of speeds is inversely proportional to the square root of the ratio of the masses. The masses are 349 and 352 units. So v349 / v352  =   ( 352/ 349)1/2 = 1.0044 . Hence difference V VΔ= 0.44 %. [235U is the isotope needed for nuclear fission. To separate it fr om the mor e abundant isotope 238U,  the mixtur e  is surr ounded by a  por ous cylinder . The por ous cylinder must be thick and narrow, so that the molecule wanders thr ough individually, colliding with the walls of the long pore

. The por ous cylinder must be thick and narrow, so that the molecule wanders thr ough individually, colliding with the walls of the long pore. The faster molecule will leak out mor e than the slower one and so there is more of the lighter molecule (enrichment) outside the por ous cylinder (Fig. 12.5). The method is not very efficient and has to be r epeated several times for sufficient enrichment.]. ⊳ When gases diffuse, their rate of diffusion is inversely proportional to square root of the masses (see Exercise 12.12 ). Can you guess the explanation from the above answer?Fig. 12.5  Molecules going through a porous wall. Example 12.7   (a)  When a molecule (or an elastic ball) hits a ( massive) wall, it rebounds with the same speed. When a ball hits a massive bat held fir mly, the same thing happens. However , when the bat is moving towards the ball, the ball rebounds with a different speed. Does the ball move faster or slower? (Ch.5 will refresh your memory on elastic collisions

. However , when the bat is moving towards the ball, the ball rebounds with a different speed. Does the ball move faster or slower? (Ch.5 will refresh your memory on elastic collisions.) (b) When gas in a cylinder is compressed by pushing in a piston, its temperatur e rises. Guess at an explanation of this in terms of kinetic theory using (a) above. (c) What happens when a compr essed gas pushes a piston out and expands. What would you observe ? (d) Sachin Tendulkar used a heavy cricket bat while playing. Did it help him in anyway ? Answer   (a)  Let the speed of the ball be u  relative to the wicket behind the bat. If the bat is moving towards the ball with a speed V  relative to the wicket, then the relative speed of the ball to bat is V + u  towards the bat. When the ball rebounds (after hitting the massive bat) its speed,  relative to bat,  is V + u  moving away from the bat. So relative to the wicket the speed of the rebounding ball is V + (V + u) = 2V + u, moving away from the wicket

. So relative to the wicket the speed of the rebounding ball is V + (V + u) = 2V + u, moving away from the wicket. So the ball speeds up after the collision with the bat. The rebound speed will be less than u if the bat is not massive. For a molecule this would imply an increase in temperature. 2024-25  252 PHYSICS You  should be able to answer (b) (c) and (d) based on the answer to (a). (Hint: Note the correspondence, piston à bat, cylinder à wicket, molecule à ball.)         ⊳ 12.5  LAW OF EQUIPARTITION OF ENERGY The kinetic energy of a single molecule is 2 2 2 1 1 1      2 2 2t x y z mv mv mv ε= + + (12.22) For a gas in thermal equilibrium at temperatur e T  the average value of ener gy denoted by   <tε> is 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 2 2 2 2t x y z B mv mv mv k Tε= + + = (12.23) Since there is no preferred direction, Eq. (12.23) implies 2 1 1    2 2x Bmv k T=  ,2 1 1    2 2y Bmv k T= , 2 1 1    2 2z Bmv k T= (12.24) A molecule free to move in space needs three coordinates to specify its location

. (12.23) implies 2 1 1    2 2x Bmv k T=  ,2 1 1    2 2y Bmv k T= , 2 1 1    2 2z Bmv k T= (12.24) A molecule free to move in space needs three coordinates to specify its location. If it is constrained to move in a plane it needs two; and if constrained to move along a line, it needs just one coor dinate to locate it. This can also be expressed in another way. W e say that it has one degr ee of fr eedom for motion in a line, two for motion in a plane and thr ee for motion in space. Motion of a body as a whole fr om one point to another is called translation. Thus, a molecule fr ee to move in space has three translational degr ees of fr eedom. Each translational degree of freedom contributes a term that contains square of some variable of motion, e.g., ½ mvx2  and similar ter ms in vy and vz. In, Eq. (12.24) we see that in thermal equilibrium, the average of each such term is ½ kBT . Molecules of a monatomic gas like argon have only translational degrees of freedom

. In, Eq. (12.24) we see that in thermal equilibrium, the average of each such term is ½ kBT . Molecules of a monatomic gas like argon have only translational degrees of freedom. But what about a diatomic gas such as O2 or N2? A molecule of O2 has thr ee translational degr ees of freedom. But in addition it can also r otate about its centre of mass. Figure 12.6 shows the two independent axes of r otation 1 and 2, nor malto the axis joining the two oxygen atoms about which the molecule can rotate *. The molecule thus has two r otational degr ees of fr eedom, each of which contributes a ter m to the total ener gy consisting of translational energy tε and rotational ener gy εr. 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 2 21 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2t r x y z mv mv mv I I ε ε ω ω + = + + + + (12.25) *Rotation along the line joining the atoms has very small moment of inertia and does not come into play for quantum mechanical reasons. See end of section 12.6.Fig. 12

.25) *Rotation along the line joining the atoms has very small moment of inertia and does not come into play for quantum mechanical reasons. See end of section 12.6.Fig. 12.6 The two independent axes of rotation of a diatomic molecule where ω1 and ω2  are the angular speeds about the axes 1 and 2 and I1, I2 are the corresponding moments of inertia. Note that each rotational degree of freedom contributes a term to the energy that contains square of a rotational variable of motion. We have assumed above that the O2 molecule is a ‘rigid rotator’, i.e., the molecule does not vibrate. This assumption, though found to be true (at moderate temperatures) for O2, is not always valid. Molecules, like CO, even at moderate temperatures have a mode of vibration, i.e., its atoms oscillate along the interatomic axis like a one-dimensional oscillator , and contribute a vibrational ener gy term εv to the total energy: εv my tky =  +1 21 22 2 d d t r vε ε ε= + + ε (12

.26) where k is the force constant of the oscillator and y the vibrational co-ordinate. Once again the vibrational energy terms in Eq. (12.26) contain squared terms of vibrational variables of motion y and d y/dt . 2024-25  KINETIC THEORY 253 At this point, notice an important feature in Eq.(12.26). While each translational and rotational degree of freedom has contributed only one ‘squared term’ in Eq.(12.26), one vibrational mode contributes two ‘squared terms’ : kinetic and potential energies. Each quadratic term occurring in the expression for energy is a mode of absorption of energy by the molecule. W e have seen that in thermal equilibrium at absolute temperature T, for each translational mode of motion, the average energy is ½ kBT. The most elegant principle of classical statistical mechanics (first proved by Maxwell) states that this is so for each mode of energy: translational, rotational and vibrational

. The most elegant principle of classical statistical mechanics (first proved by Maxwell) states that this is so for each mode of energy: translational, rotational and vibrational. That is, in equilibrium, the total energy is equally distributed in all possible energy modes, with each mode having an average energy equal to  ½ kBT. This is known as the law of equipartition of energy . Accordingly, each translational and rotational degree of freedom of a molecule contributes ½ kBT  to the energy, while each vibrational frequency contributes 2 × ½ kBT  = kBT ,  since a vibrational mode has both kinetic and potential energy modes. The proof of the law of equipartition of energy is beyond the scope of this book. Here, we shall apply the law to predict the specific heats of gases theor etically. Later , we shall also discuss briefly, the application to specific heat  of solids. 12.6  SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY 12.6.1 Monatomic Gases The molecule of a monatomic gas has only thr ee translational degr ees of fr eedom

. 12.6  SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY 12.6.1 Monatomic Gases The molecule of a monatomic gas has only thr ee translational degr ees of fr eedom. Thus, the average ener gy of a molecule at temperatur e T is (3/2) kBT .  The total internal energy of a mole of such a gas is 3 3 2 2B A U k T N RT= × = (12.27) The molar specific heat at constant volume, Cv, is  Cv (monatomic gas) = d dU T =3 2RT (12.28) For an ideal gas, Cp – Cv = R (12.29)where Cp is the molar specific heat at constant pressure.  Thus, Cp = 5 2 R    (12.30) The ratio of specific heats p v5 3C Cγ= =    (12.31) 12.6.2 Diatomic Gases As explained earlier , a diatomic molecule tr eated as a rigid r otator , like a dumbbell, has 5 degr ees of freedom: 3 translational and 2 rotational. Using the law of equipartition of ener gy, the total internal ener gy of a mole of such a gas is 5 5 2 2B A U k T N RT= × = (12.32) The molar specific heats are then given by Cv (rigid diatomic) = 5 2R, Cp = 7 2R (12.33) γ (rigid diatomic) = 7 5(12

.32) The molar specific heats are then given by Cv (rigid diatomic) = 5 2R, Cp = 7 2R (12.33) γ (rigid diatomic) = 7 5(12.34) If the diatomic molecule is not rigid but has in addition a vibrational mode U k T k T N  RTB B A= +  =5 27 2 7 9 9, , 2 2 7v p C R C R γ = = = R (12.35) 12.6.3 Polyatomic Gases In general a polyatomic molecule has 3 translational, 3 r otational degrees of freedom and a certain number (f) of vibrational modes. Accor ding to the law of equipartition of ener gy, it is easily seen that one mole of such a gas has U = 3 2  kBT + 3 2 kBT + f kBT  NA i.e.,Cv = (3 +  f ) R,  Cp = (4 + f) R, () ()f fγ4 +=3+(12.36) Note that Cp – Cv = R is true for any ideal gas, whether mono, di or polyatomic. Table 12.1 summarises the theoretical predictions for specific heats of gases ignoring any vibrational modes of motion. The values are 2024-25  254 PHYSICS⊳in good agreement with experimental values of specific heats of several gases given in Table 1 2.2

. The values are 2024-25  254 PHYSICS⊳in good agreement with experimental values of specific heats of several gases given in Table 1 2.2. Of course, there are discrepancies between predicted and actual values of specific heats of several other gases (not shown in the table), such as Cl2, C2H6 and many other polyatomic gases. Usually, the experimental values for specific heats of these gases ar e greater than the predicted values as given in Table12.1 suggesting that the agreement can be improved by including vibrational modes of motion in the calculation. The  law of equipartition of energy is, thus, w ell verified experimentally at ordinary temperatures. Table 12.1 Predicted values of specific heat capacities of gases (ignoring vibrational modes) Nature of GasCv (J mol/c451K/c451)Cp (J mol/c451K/c451)Cp/c45Cv (J mol/c451K/c451)/c103 Monatomic 12.5 20.8 8.31 1.67 Diatomic 20.8 29.1 8.31 1.40 Triatomic 24.93 33.24 8.31 1.33 Table12.2 Measured values of specific heat capacities of some gases Example 12

.5 20.8 8.31 1.67 Diatomic 20.8 29.1 8.31 1.40 Triatomic 24.93 33.24 8.31 1.33 Table12.2 Measured values of specific heat capacities of some gases Example 12.8  A cylinder of fixed capacity 44.8 litres contains helium gas at standard temperature and pressure. What is the amount of heat needed to raise the temperature of the gas in the cylinder by 15.0 °C ? (R = 8.31 J mo1–1 K–1).Answer  Using the gas law PV = µRT, you can easily show that 1 mol of any (ideal) gas at standar d temperatur e (273 K) and pr essur e (1 atm = 1.01 × 105 Pa) occupies a volume of  22.4 litres. This universal volume is called molar volume. Thus the cylinder in this example contains 2 mol of helium. Further , since helium is monatomic, its pr edicted (and observed) molar specific heat at constant volume, Cv = (3/2) R, and molar specif ic heat at constant pr essur e, Cp = (3/2) R + R = (5/2) R.  Since the volume of the cylinder is fixed, the heat required is deter mined by Cv. Ther efore, Heat required = no

.  Since the volume of the cylinder is fixed, the heat required is deter mined by Cv. Ther efore, Heat required = no. of moles × molar specific heat × rise in temperature = 2 × 1.5 R × 15.0 = 45 R = 45 × 8.31 = 374 J. ⊳ 12.6.4   Specific Heat Capacity of Solids We can use the law of equipartition of ener gy to deter mine specific heats of solids. Consider a solid of N  atoms, each vibrating about its mean position. An oscillation in o ne dimension has average energy of 2 × ½ kBT = kBT . In three dimensions, the average energy is 3 kBT. For a mole of solid, N = NA, and the total energy is U =  3  kBT × NA  = 3 RT Now at constant pressure ∆Q = ∆U + P∆V = ∆U,  since for a solid  ∆V is negligible. Hence,  3Q UC RT TΔ Δ= = =Δ Δ(12.37) Table 12.3 Specific Heat Capacity of some solids at room temperature and atmospheric pressure As Table 12.3 shows the prediction generally agrees with experimental values at ordinary temperature (Carbon is an exception). 12

.3 shows the prediction generally agrees with experimental values at ordinary temperature (Carbon is an exception). 12.7  MEAN FREE PATH Molecules in a gas have rather large speeds of the or der of the speed of sound. Y et a gas leaking 2024-25  KINETIC THEORY 255⊳from a cylinder in a kitchen takes considerable time to diffuse to the other corners of the room. The top of a cloud of smoke holds together for hours. This happens because molecules in a gas have a finite though small size, so they are bound to undergo collisions. As a result, they cannot move straight unhindered; their paths keep getting incessantly deflected. Fig. 12.7 The volume swept by a molecule in time ∆t in which any molecule will collide with it. Suppose the molecules of a gas are spheres of diameter d. Focus on a single molecule with the average speed < v>. It will suffer collision with any molecule that comes within a distance d between the centres

. Focus on a single molecule with the average speed < v>. It will suffer collision with any molecule that comes within a distance d between the centres. In time ∆t, it sweeps a volume πd2 <v> ∆t wherein any other molecule will collide with it (see Fig. 12.7). If n is the number of molecules per unit volume, the molecule suffers nπd2 <v> ∆t  collisions in time ∆t. Thus the rate of collisions is  nπd2 <v> or the time between two successive collisions is on the average, τ  = 1/( nπ <v> d2 ) (12.38) The average distance between two successive collisions, called the mean free path l, is : l  = <v> τ = 1/(n πd2) (12.39) In this derivation, we imagined the other molecules to be at rest. But actually all moleculesare moving and the collision rate is determined by the average relative velocity of the molecules. Thus we need to replace < v> by < v r> in Eq. (12.38). A more exact treatment gives ()21/ 2l n d π = (12.40) Let us estimate  l and τ  for air molecules with average speeds  < v> = ( 485m/s)

. Thus we need to replace < v> by < v r> in Eq. (12.38). A more exact treatment gives ()21/ 2l n d π = (12.40) Let us estimate  l and τ  for air molecules with average speeds  < v> = ( 485m/s). At STP n = ( ) ( )× ×23 –30.02 10 22.4 10 =  2.7  × 10 25 m -3. Taking, d = 2 × 10–10 m, τ = 6.1 × 10–10 s and l = 2.9  × 10–7 m ≈ 1500 d (12.41) As expected, the mean free path given by Eq. (12.40) depends inversely on the number density and the size of the molecules. In a highly evacuated tube n is rather small and the mean free path can be as large as the length of the tube. Example 12.9  Estimate the mean free path for a water molecule in water vapour at 373 K. Use information from Exercises 12.1 and Eq. (12.41) above. Answer  The d for water vapour is same as that of air . The number density is inversely proportional to absolute temperature. So 25 25 –3 2732

.1 and Eq. (12.41) above. Answer  The d for water vapour is same as that of air . The number density is inversely proportional to absolute temperature. So 25 25 –3 2732.7 10 2 10 m373n= × × = × Hence, mean free path –74 10 ml= × ⊳ Note that the mean free path is 100 times the interatomic distance ~ 40 Å = 4  × 10-9 m calculated earlier . It is this lar ge value of mean fr ee path that leads to the typical gaseous behaviour . Gases can not be confined without a container . Using, the kinetic theory of gases, the bulk measurable properties like viscosity, heat conductivity and dif fusion can be r elated to the microscopic parameters like molecular size. It is through such relations that the molecular sizes were first estimated. t ddv 2024-25  256 PHYSICS SUMMARY 1. The ideal gas equation connectin g pressure ( P), volume ( V) and absolute temperature (T ) is                                          PV = µ RT     = kB NT where  µ is the number of moles and N is the number of molecules

. R and kB are universal constants. R = 8.314 J mol–1 K–1,     kB  =  AR N   = 1.38 ××××× 10–23 J K–1 Real gases satisfy the ideal gas equation only approximately, more so at low pressures and high temperatures. 2. Kinetic theory of an ideal gas gives the relation                                         2 1 3P   n m v= where n is number density of molecules, m the mass of the molecule and 2v    is the mean of squared speed. Combined with the ideal gas equation it yields a kinetic interpretation of temperature. 2 1 3 2 2B  m v    k  T= ,  ()1/22 rmsv v=3Bk T m= This tells us that  the temperature of a gas is a measure of the average kinetic energy of a molecule,  independent of the nature of the gas or molecule.  In a mixture of gases at a fixed temperature the heavier molecule has the lower average speed. 3. The translational kinetic energy E =  23 kB NT. This leads to a relation PV = 2 3 E 4

.  In a mixture of gases at a fixed temperature the heavier molecule has the lower average speed. 3. The translational kinetic energy E =  23 kB NT. This leads to a relation PV = 2 3 E 4. The law of equipartition of energy states that if a system is in equilibrium at absolute temperatur e T, the total ener gy is distributed equally in dif ferent ener gy modes of absorption, the energy in each mode being equal to ½ kB T. Each translational and rotational degree of freedom corresponds to one energy mode of absorption and has energy ½ kB T. Each vibrational frequency has two modes of energy (kinetic and potential) with corresponding energy equal to 2 × ×× ×× ½ kB T = kB T. 5. Using the law of equipartition of energy, the molar specific heats of gases can be determined and the values are in agreement with the experimental values of specific heats of several gases. The agreement can be improved by including vibrational modes of motion. 6

. The agreement can be improved by including vibrational modes of motion. 6. The mean free path l is the average distance covered by a molecule between two successive collisions : 21 2π = l  n  d where n  is the number density and  d the diameter of the molecule. 2024-25  KINETIC THEORY 257 POINTS TO PONDER 1. Pressure of a fluid is not only exerted on the wall. Pressure exists everywhere in a fluid. Any layer of gas inside the volume of a container is in equilibrium because the pressure is the same on both sides of the layer . 2. We should not have an exaggerated idea of the intermolecular distance in a gas. At ordinary pressures and temperatures, this is only 10 times or so the interatomic distance in solids and liquids. What is different is the mean free path which in a gas is 100 times the interatomic distance and 1000 times the size of the molecule. 3. The law of equipartition of energy is stated thus: the energy for each degree of freedom in thermal equilibrium is ½ k B T

. 3. The law of equipartition of energy is stated thus: the energy for each degree of freedom in thermal equilibrium is ½ k B T. Each quadratic term in the total energy expression of a molecule is to be counted as a degree of freedom. Thus, each vibrational mode gives 2 (not 1) degrees of freedom (kinetic and potential energy modes), corresponding to the energy 2 × ×× ×× ½ k B T = k B T. 4. Molecules of air in a room do not all fall and settle on the ground (due to gravity) because of their high speeds and incessant collisions. In equilibrium, there is a very slight increase in density at lower heights (like in the atmosphere). The effect is small since the potential energy ( mgh) for ordinary heights is much less than the average kinetic energy ½ mv2 of the molecules. 5. < v2 >  is not always equal to ( < v >)2. The average of a squared quantity is not necessarily the square of the average. Can you find examples for this statement. EXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISES 12.112.112.1 12.112

. The average of a squared quantity is not necessarily the square of the average. Can you find examples for this statement. EXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISES 12.112.112.1 12.112.1 Estimate the fraction of molecular volume to the actual volume occupied by oxygen gas at STP . Take the diameter of an oxygen molecule to be 3 Å. 12.2 12.212.212.212.2 Molar volume is the volume occupied by 1 mol of any (ideal) gas at standard temperature and pressure (STP : 1 atmospheric pressure, 0 ° C). Show that it is 22.4 litres. 12.3 12.312.3 12.312.3 Figure 12.8 shows plot of PV/T  versus P for 1.00 × ×× ××10–3 kg of oxygen gas at two different temperatures. Fig. 12.8Fig. 12.8Fig. 12.8Fig. 12.8Fig. 12.8 (a) What does the dotted plot signify? (b) Which is true: T1 > T2 or T1 < T2? (c) What is the value of PV/T where the curves meet on the y-axis?PV T(J□K□□□)–1 PT1T2 xy 2024-25  258 PHYSICS (d) If we obtained similar plots for 1

.00 × ×× ××10–3 kg of hydrogen, would we get the same value of PV/T  at the point where the curves meet on the y-axis? If not, what mass of hydrogen yields the same value of PV/T  (for low pressure high temperature region of the plot) ? (Molecular mass of H2 = 2.02 u, of O2 = 32.0 u, R = 8.31 J mo1–1 K–1.) 12.4 12.412.4 12.412.4 An oxygen cylinder of volume 30 litre has an initial gauge pressure of 15 atm and a temperature of 27 °C. After some oxygen is withdrawn fr om the cylinder , the gauge pressure drops to 11 atm and its temperature drops to 17 °C. Estimate the mass of oxygen taken out of the cylinder ( R = 8.31 J mol–1 K–1, molecular mass of O2 = 32 u). 12.5 12.512.5 12.512.5 An air bubble of volume 1.0 cm3 rises from the bottom of a lake 40 m deep at a temperature of 12 °C. To what volume does it grow when it reaches the surface, which is at a temperature of 35 °C ? 12.6 12.612.6 12.612

.0 cm3 rises from the bottom of a lake 40 m deep at a temperature of 12 °C. To what volume does it grow when it reaches the surface, which is at a temperature of 35 °C ? 12.6 12.612.6 12.612.6 Estimate the total number of air molecules (inclusive of oxygen, nitrogen, water vapour and other constituents) in a room of capacity 25.0 m3 at a temperature of 27 °C and 1 atm pressure. 12.7 12.712.7 12.712.7 Estimate the average thermal energy of a helium atom at (i) room temperature (27 °C), (ii) the temperature on the surface of the Sun (6000 K), (iii) the temperature of 10 million kelvin (the typical cor e temperatur e in the case of a star). 12.8 12.812.8 12.812.8 Three vessels of equal capacity have gases at the same temperature and pressure. The first vessel contains neon (monatomic), the second contains chlorine (diatomic), and the thir d contains uranium hexafluoride (polyatomic)

. The first vessel contains neon (monatomic), the second contains chlorine (diatomic), and the thir d contains uranium hexafluoride (polyatomic). Do the vessels contain equal number of r espective molecules ? Is the r oot mean squar e speed of molecules the same in the thr ee cases? If not, in which case is vrms the lar gest ? 12.9 12.912.9 12.912.9 At what temperature is the root mean square speed of an atom in an argon gas cylinder equal to the rms speed of a helium gas atom at – 20 °C ? (atomic mass of Ar = 39.9 u, of He = 4.0 u). 12.10 12.1012.10 12.1012.10 Estimate the mean free path and collision frequency of a nitrogen molecule in a cylinder containing nitrogen at 2.0 atm and temperature 17 0C. Take the radius of a nitrogen molecule to be roughly 1.0 Å. Compare the collision time with the time the molecule moves freely between two successive collisions (Molecular mass of N2 = 28.0 u). 2024-25  CHAPTER  THIRTEEN OSCILLATIONS 13.1 INTRODUCTION In our daily life we come across various kinds of motions

.0 u). 2024-25  CHAPTER  THIRTEEN OSCILLATIONS 13.1 INTRODUCTION In our daily life we come across various kinds of motions. You have alr eady lear nt about some of them, e.g., r ectilinear motion and motion of a projectile. Both these motions are non-r epetitive. W e have also lear nt about unifor m cir cular motion and orbital motion of planets in the solar system. In these cases, the motion is repeated after a certain interval of time, that is, it is periodic. In your childhood, you must have enjoyed rocking in a cradle or swinging on a swing. Both these motions are repetitive in nature but different from the periodic motion of a planet. Here, the object moves to and fro about a mean position. The pendulum of a wall clock executes a similar motion. Examples of such periodic to and fro motion abound: a boat tossing up and down in a river , the piston in a steam engine going back and forth, etc. Such a motion is termed as oscillatory motion. In this chapter we study this motion

. Such a motion is termed as oscillatory motion. In this chapter we study this motion. The study of oscillatory motion is basic to physics; its concepts are required for the understanding of many physical phenomena. In musical instruments, like the sitar , the guitar or the violin, we come across vibrating strings that produce pleasing sounds. The membranes in drums and diaphragms in telephone and speaker systems vibrate to and fro about their mean positions. The vibrations of air molecules make the propagation of sound possible. In a solid, the atoms vibrate about their equilibrium positions, the average energy of vibrations being proportional to temperature. AC power supply give voltage that oscillates alternately going positive and negative about the mean value (zero). The description of a periodic motion, in general, and oscillatory motion, in particular , requires some fundamental concepts, like period, frequency, displacement, amplitude and phase. These concepts are developed in the next section.13

. These concepts are developed in the next section.13.1 Introduction 13.2 Periodic and oscillatory motions 13.3 Simple harmonic motion 13.4 Simple harmonic motion and uniform circular motion 13.5 Velocity and acceleration in simple harmonic motion 13.6 Force law for simple harmonic motion 13.7 Energy in simple harmonic motion 13.8 The simple pendulum Summary Points to ponder Exercises 2024-25  PHYSICS 260 13.2 PERIODIC AND OSCILLATORY MOTIONS Fig. 13.1 shows some periodic motions. Suppose an insect climbs up a ramp and falls down, it comes back to the initial point and repeats the process identically. If you draw a graph of its height above the ground versus time, it would look something like Fig. 13.1 (a). If a child climbs up a step, comes down, and repeats the process identically, its height above the ground would look like that in Fig. 13.1 (b). When you play the game of bouncing a ball off the ground, between your palm and the ground, its height versus time graph would look like the one in Fig. 13.1 (c)

. 13.1 (b). When you play the game of bouncing a ball off the ground, between your palm and the ground, its height versus time graph would look like the one in Fig. 13.1 (c). Note that both the curved parts in Fig. 13.1 (c) are sections of a parabola given by the Newton’s equation of motion (see section 2.6), 21 2 +gt h = ut  for downward motion, and 21 2 –gt h = ut  for upward motion, with different values of u in each case. These are examples of periodic motion. Thus, a motion that repeats itself at regular intervals of time is called periodic motion. Fig. 1 3.1Examples of periodic motion. The period T is shown in each case.Very often, the body under going periodic motion has an equilibrium position somewhere inside its path. When the body is at this position no net external force acts on it. Therefore, if it is left ther e at r est, it r emains ther e forever

. When the body is at this position no net external force acts on it. Therefore, if it is left ther e at r est, it r emains ther e forever. If the body is given a small displacement from the position, a force comes into play which tries to bring the body back to the equilibrium point, giving rise to oscillations  or vibrations . For example, a ball placed in a bowl will be in equilibrium at the bottom. If displaced a little from the point, it will perform oscillations in the bowl. Every oscillatory motion is periodic, but every periodic motion need not be oscillatory. Circular motion is a periodic motion, but it is not oscillatory. There is no significant difference between oscillations and vibrations. It seems that when the frequency is small, we call it oscillation (like, the oscillation of a branch of a tree), while when the frequency is high, we call it vibration (like, the vibration of a string of a musical instrument). Simple harmonic motion is the simplest form of oscillatory motion

. Simple harmonic motion is the simplest form of oscillatory motion. This motion arises when the force on the oscillating body is directly proportional to its displacement from the mean position, which is also the equilibrium position. Further , at any point in its oscillation, this force is directed towards the mean position. In practice, oscillating bodies eventually come to rest at their equilibrium positions because of the damping due to friction and other dissipative causes.  However , they can be for ced to remain oscillating by means of some external periodic agency.  W e discuss the phenomena of damped and forced oscillations later in the chapter . Any material medium can be pictured as a collection of a large number of coupled oscillators. The collective oscillations of the constituents of a medium manifest themselves as waves. Examples of waves include water waves, seismic waves, electromagnetic waves. We shall study the wave phenomenon in the next chapter . 13.2

. Examples of waves include water waves, seismic waves, electromagnetic waves. We shall study the wave phenomenon in the next chapter . 13.2.1 Period and frequency We have seen that any motion that r epeats itself at regular intervals of time is called periodic motion . The smallest interva l of time after which the motion is repeated is called its period . Let us denote the period by the symbol T. Its SI unit is second. For periodic motions,(a) (b) (c) 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 261 which are either too fast or too slow on the scale of seconds, other convenient units of time are used. The period of vibrations of a quartz crystal is expressed in units of microseconds (10–6 s) abbreviated as µs. On the other hand, the orbital period of the planet Mercury is 88 earth days. The Halley’s comet appears after every 76 years. The reciprocal of T gives the number of repetitions that occur per unit time. This quantity is called the frequency of the periodic motion . It is represented by the symbol ν

. The reciprocal of T gives the number of repetitions that occur per unit time. This quantity is called the frequency of the periodic motion . It is represented by the symbol ν. The relation between ν and T is ν  = 1/T  (13.1) The unit of ν is thus s–1. After the discoverer of radio waves, Heinrich Rudolph Hertz (1857 –1894), a special name has been given to the unit of frequency. It is called hertz (abbreviated as Hz). Thus, 1 hertz  = 1 Hz =1 oscillation per second =1 s–1  (13.2) Note, that the frequency, ν, is not necessarily an integer . uExample 13.1  On an average, a human heart is found to beat 75 times in a minute. Calculate its frequency and period. Answer   The beat frequency of heart = 75/(1 min)      = 75/(60 s)                                                     = 1.25 s–1                                                     = 1.25 Hz              The time period T         = 1/(1.25 s–1)                                                     = 0.8 s⊳ 13.2.2   Displacement In section 3

.25 Hz              The time period T         = 1/(1.25 s–1)                                                     = 0.8 s⊳ 13.2.2   Displacement In section 3.2, we defined displacement of a particle as t he change in its position vector . In this chapter , we use the ter m displacement in a more general sense. It refers to change with time of any physical property under consideration. For example, in case of rectilinear motion of a steel ball on a surface, the distance from the starting point as a function of time is its position displacement. The choice of origin is a matter of convenience. Consider a block attached to a spring, the other end of the spring is fixed to a rigid wall [see Fig.13.2(a)]. Generally, it is convenient to measure displacement of the body from its equilibrium position. For  an oscillating simple pendulum, the angle from the vertical as a function of time may be regardedas a displacement variable [see Fig.13.2(b)]. The term displacement is not always to be referred Fig. 13

.13.2(b)]. The term displacement is not always to be referred Fig. 13.2(a) A block attached to a spring, the other end of which is fixed to a rigid wall. The block moves on a frictionless surface. The motion of the block can be described in terms of its distance or displacement x from the equilibrium position . Fig.13.2(b) An oscillating simple pendulum; its motion can be described in terms of angular displacement θ from the vertical. in the context of position only. There can be many other kinds of displacement variables. The voltage acr oss a capacitor , changing with time in an AC circuit, is also a displacement variable. In the same way, pressure variations in time in the propagation of sound wave, the changing electric and magnetic fields in a light wave are examples of displacement in different contexts. The displacement variable may take both positive and negative values. In experiments on oscillations, the displacement is measured for different times

. The displacement variable may take both positive and negative values. In experiments on oscillations, the displacement is measured for different times. The displacement can be represented by a mathematical function of time. In case of periodic motion, this function is periodic in time. One of the simplest periodic functions is given by     f(t) = A cos ωt (13.3a) If the argument of this function, ωt, is increased by an integral multiple of 2 π radians, the value of the function remains the same. The 2024-25  PHYSICS 262 function f(t) is then periodic and its period, T, is given by     ωπ2=  T     (13.3b) Thus, the function f (t) is periodic with period T, f(t) = f(t+T) The same result is obviously correct if we consider a sine function, f(t) = A sin ωt. Further , a linear combination of sine and cosine functions like,        f(t)  =  A sin ωt + B cos ωt                 (13.3c) is also a periodic function with the same period T. Taking, A = D cos φ  and  B = D sin φ Eq. (13

.3c) is also a periodic function with the same period T. Taking, A = D cos φ  and  B = D sin φ Eq. (13.3c) can be written as, f(t) = D sin (ωt + φ ) ,                        (13.3d) Here D and φ are constant given by 2 2 1and tanφ =  –D = A + B    B A   The great importance of periodic sine and cosine functions is due to a remarkable result proved by the French mathematician, Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768–1830): Any periodic function can be expressed as a superposition of sine and cosine functions of different time periods with suitable coefficients . uExample 13.2    Which of the following functions of time represent (a) periodic and (b) non-periodic motion? Give the period for each case of periodic motion [ ω is any positive constant]. (i)sin ωt + cos ωt (ii)sin ωt + cos 2 ωt + sin 4 ωt (iii)e–ωt (iv)log (ωt) Answer (i)sin ωt + cos ωt is a periodic function, it can also be written as 2 sin ( ωt + π/4)

. (i)sin ωt + cos ωt (ii)sin ωt + cos 2 ωt + sin 4 ωt (iii)e–ωt (iv)log (ωt) Answer (i)sin ωt + cos ωt is a periodic function, it can also be written as 2 sin ( ωt + π/4). Now 2 sin ( ωt + π/4)= 2 sin ( ωt + π/4+2 π)        = 2 sin [ ω (t + 2 π/ω) + π/4] The periodic time of the function is 2 π/ω.(ii)This is an example of a periodic motion. It can be noted that each term represents a periodic function with a different angular frequency. Since period is the least interval of time after which a function repeats its value, sin ωt has a period T0= 2π/ω; cos 2 ωt has a period π/ω =T0/2; and sin 4 ωt has a period 2 π/4ω = T0/4. The period of the first term is a multiple of the periods of the last two terms. Therefore, the smallest interval of time after which the sum of the three terms repeats is T0, and thus, the sum is a periodic function with a period 2 π/ω. (iii)The function e–ωt is not periodic, it decreases monotonically with increasing time and tends to zero as t → ∞ and thus, never repeats its value

. (iii)The function e–ωt is not periodic, it decreases monotonically with increasing time and tends to zero as t → ∞ and thus, never repeats its value. (iv)The function lo g(ωt) increases monotonically with time t. It, therefore, never repeats its value and is a non- periodic function. It may be noted that as t → ∞, log( ωt) diverges to ∞. It, therefore, cannot represent any kind of physical displacement.               ⊳ 13.3 SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION Consider a particle oscillating back and forth about the origin of an x-axis between the limits +A and – A as shown in Fig. 13.3. This oscillatory motion is said to be simple harmonic if the displacement x of the particle from the origin varies with time as : x (t) = A cos ( ω t + φ) (13.4) Fig. 13.3 A particle vibrating back and forth about the origin of x-axis, between the limits +A and –A. where A, ω and φ are constants. Thus, simple harmonic motion (SHM) is not any periodic motion but one in which displacement is a sinusoidal function of time. Fig. 13

. where A, ω and φ are constants. Thus, simple harmonic motion (SHM) is not any periodic motion but one in which displacement is a sinusoidal function of time. Fig. 13.4 shows the positions of a particle executing SHM at discrete value of time, each interval of time being T/4, where T is the period of motion. Fig. 13.5 plots the graph of x versus t, which gives the values of displacement as a continuous function of time. The quantities A, 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 263 ω and φ which characterize a given SHM have standard names, as summarised in Fig. 13.6. Let us understand these quantities. The amplitutde A of SHM is the magnitude of maximum displacement of the particle. [Note, A can be taken to be positive withoutany loss of generality]. As the cosine function of time varies from +1 to –1, the displacement varies between the extremes A and – A. Two simple harmonic motions may have same ω and φ but different amplitudes A and B , as shown in Fig. 1 3.7 (a)

. Two simple harmonic motions may have same ω and φ but different amplitudes A and B , as shown in Fig. 1 3.7 (a). While the amplitude A is fixed for a given SHM, the state of motion (position and velocity) of the particle at any time t  is determined by the Fig. 13.4 The location of the particle in SHM at the discr ete values t = 0, T/4, T/2, 3T/4, T , 5T/4. The time after which motion repeats itself is T . T will r emain fixed, no matter what location you choose as the initial (t = 0) location. The speed is maximum for zero displacement (at x = 0) and zero at the extremes of motion. Fig. 13.5 Displacement as a continuous function of time for simple harmonic motion. Fig. 13.7 (b) A plot obtained from Eq. (13 .4). The curves 3 and 4 are for φ = 0 and - π/4 respectively. The amplitude A is same for both the plots .Fig. 13.7 (a) A plot of displacement as a function of time as obtained from Eq. (14.4) with φ = 0. The curves 1 and 2 are for two different amplitudes A and B

.Fig. 13.7 (a) A plot of displacement as a function of time as obtained from Eq. (14.4) with φ = 0. The curves 1 and 2 are for two different amplitudes A and B. x (t):displacement x as a function of time t A :amplitude ω :angular frequency ωt + φ:phase (time-dependent) φ :phase constant Fig. 1 3.6  The meaning of standard symbols in Eq. (13.4)argument ( ωt + φ) in the cosine function. This time-dependent quantity, ( ωt + φ) is called the phase  of the motion. The value of plase at t = 0 is φ and is called the phase constant  (or phase angle ). If the amplitude is known, φ can be determined from the displacement at t = 0. Two simple harmonic motions may have the same A and ω but different phase angle φ, as shown in Fig. 13.7 (b). Finally, the quantity ω can be seen to be related to the period of motion T. Taking, for simplicity, φ = 0 in Eq. (13.4), we have 2024-25  PHYSICS 264 x(t) = A cos ωt   (13.5) Since the motion has a period T, x (t) is equal to x (t + T). That is, A cos ωt = A cos ω (t + T)     (13

. (13.4), we have 2024-25  PHYSICS 264 x(t) = A cos ωt   (13.5) Since the motion has a period T, x (t) is equal to x (t + T). That is, A cos ωt = A cos ω (t + T)     (13.6) Now the cosine function is periodic with period 2π, i.e., it first repeats itself when the argument changes by 2 π. Therefore, ω(t + T ) = ωt + 2 π that is ω = 2π/ T (13.7) ω is called the angular frequency of SHM. Its S.I. unit is radians per second. Since the frequency of oscillations is simply 1/T, ω is 2 π times the frequency of oscillation. Two simple harmonic motions may have the same A and φ, but different ω, as seen in Fig. 13.8. In this plot the curve (b) has half the period and twice the frequency of the curve (a).This function represents a simple harmonic motion having a period T = 2 π/ω and a phase angle (– π/4) or (7 π/4) (b)sin2 ωt = ½ – ½ cos 2 ωt The function is periodic having a period T = π/ω. It also represents a harmonic motion with the point of equilibrium occurring at ½ instead of zero.                      ⊳ 13

. It also represents a harmonic motion with the point of equilibrium occurring at ½ instead of zero.                      ⊳ 13.4  SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION AND UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION In this section,  we show that the projection of uniform circular motion on a diameter of the circle follows simple harmonic motion. A simple experiment (Fig.  13.9) helps us visuali se this connection.  Tie a ball to the end of a string and make it move in a horizontal plane about a fixed point with a constant angular speed. The ball would then perform a uniform circular motion in the horizontal plane. Observe the ball sideways or from the front, fixing your attention in the plane of motion. The ball will appear to execute to and fro motion along a horizontal line with the point of rotation as the midpoint. Y ou could alter natively observe the shadow of the ball on a wall which is perpendicular to the plane of the circle

. Y ou could alter natively observe the shadow of the ball on a wall which is perpendicular to the plane of the circle. In this process what we are observing is the motion of the ball on a diameter of the circle normal to the direction of viewing. Fig. 13.9 Circular motion of a ball in a plane viewed edge-on is SHM.Fig. 13.8    Plots of Eq. (13.4) for φ  = 0 for two different periods. uExample  13.3  Which of the following functions of time represent (a) simple harmonic motion and (b) periodic but not simple harmonic? Give the period for each case. (1)sin ωt – cos ωt (2)sin2 ωt Answer (a)sin ωt – cos ωt = sin ωt – sin ( π/2 – ωt) = 2 cos ( π/4)  sin ( ωt – π/4)                    = √2 sin ( ωt – π/4)Fig. 13.10 describes the same situation mathematically. Suppose a particle P is moving uniformly on a circle of radius A with angular speed ω. The sense of rotation is anticlockwise. The initial position vector of the particle, i.e., the vector OP at t = 0 makes an angle of φ with the positive direction of x-axis

. The sense of rotation is anticlockwise. The initial position vector of the particle, i.e., the vector OP at t = 0 makes an angle of φ with the positive direction of x-axis. In time t, it will cover a further angle ωt and its position vector 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 265 will make an angle of ωt + φ with the +ve x-axis. Next , consider the projection of the position vector OP on the x-axis. This will be OP′. The position of P ′ on the x-axis, as the particle P moves on the circle, is given by x(t) =  A cos ( ωt + φ) which is the defining equation of SHM. This shows  that if P moves uniformly on a circle, its projection P′ on a diameter of the circle executes SHM. The particle P and the circle on which it moves ar e sometimes referred to as the reference particle  and the reference circle , respectively. We can take pr ojection of the motion of P on any diameter , say the y-axis

. We can take pr ojection of the motion of P on any diameter , say the y-axis. In that case, the displacement y(t) of P′ on the y-axis is given by y = A sin ( ωt + φ) which is also an SHM of the same amplitude as that of the projection on x-axis, but differing by a phase of π/2. In spite of this connection between circular motion and SHM, the force acting on a particle in linear simple harmonic motion is very different from the centripetal force needed to keep a particle in uniform circular motion.uExample 13.4    The figure given below depicts two circular motions. The radius of the circle, the period of revolution, the initial position and the sense of revolution are indicated in the figures. Obtain the simple harmonic motions of the x-projection of the radius vector of the rotating particle P in each case. Answer (a)At t = 0, OP makes an angle of 45o = π/4 rad with the (positive direction o f) x-axis

. Answer (a)At t = 0, OP makes an angle of 45o = π/4 rad with the (positive direction o f) x-axis. After time t, it covers an angle tTπ2 in the anticlockwise sense, and makes an angle of  4 +  2 π πtT  with the x-axis. The projection of OP on the x-axis at time t is given by, x (t) = A cos 2 + 4π π Tt   For T = 4 s, x(t) = A cos  2 4 + 4π πt   which is a SHM of amplitude A, period 4 s, and an initial phase* =  4π  . *The natural unit of angle is radian, defined through the ratio of arc to radius. Angle is a dimensionless quantity. Therefore it is not always necessary to mention the unit ‘radian’ when we use π, its multiples or submultiples. The conversion between radian and degree is not similar to that between met re and centimetre or mile. If the argument of a trigonometric function is stated without units, it is understood that the unit is radian. On the other hand, if degree is to be used as the unit of angle, then it must be shown explicit ly

. On the other hand, if degree is to be used as the unit of angle, then it must be shown explicit ly. For example, sin(150) means sine of 15 degree, but sin(15) means sine of 15 radians. Hereafter , we will often dr op ‘rad’ as the unit, and it should be understood that whenever angle is mentioned as a numerical value, without units, it is to be taken as radians.Fig. 13.10 2024-25  PHYSICS 266 (b)In this case at t = 0, OP makes an angle of 90o =  2π with the x-axis. After a time t, it covers an angle of 2tTπ in the clockwise sense and makes an angle of  π π 2  2−  Tt with the x-axis. The projection of OP on the x-axis at time t is given by x(t) = B cos π π 2  2−  Tt = B sin 2π Tt   For T = 30 s,            x(t) = B sin π 15t   Writing this as x (t) = B cos π π 15  2t−  , and comparing with Eq. (1 3.4).  W e find that this represents a SHM of amplitu de B, period  30 s, and an initial phase of 2π−.⊳ 13

. (1 3.4).  W e find that this represents a SHM of amplitu de B, period  30 s, and an initial phase of 2π−.⊳ 13.5 VELOCITY AND ACCELERATION IN SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION The speed of a particle v in uniform circular motion is its angular speed ω times the radius of the circle A. v = ω A      (13.8) The direction of velocity v at a time t is along the tangent to the circle at the point where the particle is located at that instant. From the geometry of Fig. 13.11, it is clear that the velocity of the projection particle P ′ at time t is v(t) = – ωA sin ( ωt + φ )              (13.9)where the negative sign shows that v (t) has a direction opposite to the positive direction of x-axis. Eq. (13.9) gives the instantaneous velocity of a particle executing SHM, where displacement is given by Eq. (13.4). W e can, of course, obtain this equation without using geometrical argument, directly by differentiating (Eq. 13.4) with respect of t: d( )dv(t) = x tt(13

. (13.4). W e can, of course, obtain this equation without using geometrical argument, directly by differentiating (Eq. 13.4) with respect of t: d( )dv(t) = x tt(13.10) The method of reference circle can be similarly used for obtaining instantaneous acceleration of a particle under going SHM. W e know that the centripetal acceleration of a particle P in uniform circular motion has a magnitude v2/A or ω2A, and it is directed towards the centre i.e., the direction is along PO. The instantaneous acceleration of the projection particle P ′ is then (See Fig. 13.12) a (t)  = – ω2A cos ( ωt + φ)                = – ω2x (t) (13.11) Fig. 13.11 The velocity, v (t), of the particle P ′ is the projection of the velocity v of the reference particle, P .Fig. 13.12 The acceleration, a(t), of the particle P ′ is the projection of the acceleration a of the reference particle P . Eq. (13.11) gives the acceleration of a particle in SHM. The same equation can again be obtained directly by differentiating velocity v(t) given by Eq

. Eq. (13.11) gives the acceleration of a particle in SHM. The same equation can again be obtained directly by differentiating velocity v(t) given by Eq. (13.9) with respect to time: d( ) ( )da t  = v tt(13.12) We note fr om Eq. (13.11) the important property that acceleration of a particle in SHM is proportional to displacement. For x( t) > 0, a(t) < 0 and for  x(t) < 0, a(t) > 0. Thus,  whatever 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 267 the value of x between – A and A, the acceleration a(t) is always directed towards the centre. For simplicity, let us put φ = 0 and write the expression for x (t), v (t) and a(t) x(t) = A cos ωt, v(t) = – ω Asin ωt, a(t)=–ω2 A cos ωt The corresponding plots are shown in Fig. 13.13. All quantities vary sinusoidally with time; only their maxima differ and the different plots differ in phase. x varies between – A to A; v(t) varies from – ωA to ωA and a(t) from – ω2A to ω2A

. 13.13. All quantities vary sinusoidally with time; only their maxima differ and the different plots differ in phase. x varies between – A to A; v(t) varies from – ωA to ωA and a(t) from – ω2A to ω2A. With respect to displacement plot, velocity plot has a phase difference of π/2 and acceleration plot has a phase difference of π.(b)Using Eq. (13.9), the speed of the body = – (5.0 m)(2 π s–1) sin [(2 π s–1) ×1.5 s + π/4] = – (5.0 m)(2 π s–1) sin [(3 π + π/4)]        = 1 0π × 0.707 m s–1        = 22 m s–1 (c)Using Eq.(13.10), the acceleration of the body = –(2 π s–1)2 × displacement            = – (2 π s–1)2 × (–3.535 m)            = 140 m s–2⊳ 13.6 FORCE LAW FOR SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION Using Newton’s second law of motion, and the expression for acceleration of a particle undergoing SHM (Eq. 13.11), the force acting on a particle of mass m in SHM is F (t)  = ma     = –mω2 x (t) i.e.,F (t)  = –k x (t) (13.13) where  k = m ω2(13.14a) or ω =  k m(13

. 13.11), the force acting on a particle of mass m in SHM is F (t)  = ma     = –mω2 x (t) i.e.,F (t)  = –k x (t) (13.13) where  k = m ω2(13.14a) or ω =  k m(13.14b) Like acceleration, force is always directed towards the mean position—hence it is sometimes called the restoring force in SHM. To summari se the discussion so far , simple har monic motion can be defined in two equivalent ways, either by Eq. (13.4) for displacement or by Eq. (1 3.13) that gives its force law. Going from Eq. (1 3.4) to Eq. (1 3.13) required us to differentiate two times. Likewise , by integrating the force law Eq. (1 3.13) two times, we can get back Eq. (1 3.4). Note that the force in Eq. (13.13) is linearly proportional to x(t). A particle oscillating under such a force is, therefore, calling a linear harmonic oscillator . In the r eal world, the for ce may contain small additional terms proportional to x2, x3, etc. These then are called non-linear oscillators. uExample 13

. In the r eal world, the for ce may contain small additional terms proportional to x2, x3, etc. These then are called non-linear oscillators. uExample 13.6  Two identical springs of spring constant k are attached to a block of mass m and to fixed supports as shown in Fig. 13.14. Show that when the mass is displaced from its equilibrium position on either side, it executes a simple harmonic motion. Find the period of oscillations.Fig. 1 3.13Displacement, velocity and acceleration of a particle in simple harmonic motion have the same period T , but they dif fer in phase uExample 13.5   A body oscillates with SHM according to the equation (in SI units),      x = 5 cos [2 π t + π/4]. At t = 1.5 s, calculate the (a) displacement, (b) speed and (c) acceleration of the body. Answer  The angular frequency ω of the body = 2π s–1 and its time period T = 1 s. At t = 1.5 s (a)displacement = (5.0 m) cos [(2 π s–1)× 1.5 s + π/4] = (5.0 m) cos [(3 π + π/4)] = –5.0  × 0.707 m = –3.535 m 2024-25  PHYSICS 268 Fig. 13

. At t = 1.5 s (a)displacement = (5.0 m) cos [(2 π s–1)× 1.5 s + π/4] = (5.0 m) cos [(3 π + π/4)] = –5.0  × 0.707 m = –3.535 m 2024-25  PHYSICS 268 Fig. 13.14 Answer  Let the mass be displaced by a small distance x to the right side of the equilibrium position, as shown in Fig. 13.15. Under this situation the spring on the left side gets Fig. 13.15 elongated by a length equal to x and that on the right side gets compressed by the same length. The forces acting on the mass are then, F1   = –k x (force exerted by the spring on the left side, trying to pull the mass towards the mean position) F2   =  –kx (force exerted by the spring on the right side, trying to push the mass towards the mean position) The net for ce, F, acting on the mass is then given by, F   = –2kx Hence the force acting on the mass is proportional to the displacement and is directed towards the mean position; therefore, the motion executed by the mass is simple harmonic. The time period of oscillations is, T = 2  m 2kπ ⊳13

. The time period of oscillations is, T = 2  m 2kπ ⊳13.7 ENERGY IN SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION Both kinetic and potential energies of a particle in SHM vary  between zero and their maximum values. In section 13.5 we have seen that the velocity of a particle executing SHM, is a periodic function of time. It is zero at the extreme positions of displacement. Therefore, the kinetic energy ( K) of such a particle,  which is defined as 2 21mv  =  K 2 2 2 1sin ( + )2= m A  t  ω ω φ 2 1sin ( + )22=  k A t ω φ     (13.15) is also a periodic function of time, being zero when the displacement is maximum and maximum when the particle is at the mean position. Note, since  the sign of v is immaterial in K, the period of K is T/2. What is the potential energy ( U) of a particle executing simple harmonic motion? In Chapter 6, we have seen that the concept of potential energy is possible only for conservative forces. The spring force F = –kx  is a conservative force, with associated potential energy 2 1 2U = k x (13

. The spring force F = –kx  is a conservative force, with associated potential energy 2 1 2U = k x (13.16) Hence the potential energy of a particle executing simple harmonic motion is, U(x)  =   2 21x  k            2 2 1cos ( + )2= k A t ω φ  (13.17) Thus, the potential energy of a particle executing simple harmonic motion is also periodic, with period T/2, being zero at the mean position and maximum at the extreme displacements. 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 269 It follows from Eqs. (13.15) and (13.17) that the total energy, E, of the system is, E  = U + K 2 2 2 2  1 1cos ( + ) + sin ( + )2 2=  k A t  k A t ω φ ω φ 2 2 2 1cos ( + ) + sin ( + )2=  k A t t ω φ ω φ    Using the familiar trigonometric identity, the value of the expression in the brackets is unity. Thus, 2 1 2E =  k A (13.18) The total mechanical energy of a harmonic oscillator is thus independent of time as expected for motion under any conservative force

. Thus, 2 1 2E =  k A (13.18) The total mechanical energy of a harmonic oscillator is thus independent of time as expected for motion under any conservative force. The time and displacement dependence of the potential and kinetic energies of a linear simple harmonic oscillator are shown in Fig. 1 3.16.Observe that both kinetic energy and potential energy in SHM are seen to be always positive in Fig. 1 3.16. Kinetic energy can, of course, be never negative, since it is proportional to the square of speed. Potential energy is positive by choice of the undermined constant in potential energy. Both kinetic energy and potential energy peak twice during each period of SHM. For x = 0, the energy is kinetic; at the extremes x = ±A, it is all potential energy. In the course of motion between these limits, kinetic energy increases at the expense of potential energy or vice-versa. u Example 13.7   A block whose mass is 1 kg is fastened to a spring. The spring has a spring constant of 50 N m–1

. u Example 13.7   A block whose mass is 1 kg is fastened to a spring. The spring has a spring constant of 50 N m–1. The block is pulled to a distance x = 10 cm from its equilibrium position at x = 0 on a frictionless surface from rest at t = 0. Calculate the kinetic, potential and total energies of the block when it is 5 cm away from the mean position. Answer  The block executes SHM, its angular frequency, as given by Eq. (13.14b), is ω =  k m  =  50 N m– 1 1kg              = 7.07 rad s–1 Its displacement at any time t is then given by, x(t) = 0.1 cos (7.07 t) Therefore, when the particle is 5 cm away from the mean position, we have 0.05 = 0.1 cos (7.07 t)Fig. 1 3.16Kinetic energy, potential energy and total energy as a function of time [shown in (a)] and displacement [shown in (b)] of a particle in SHM. The kinetic energy and potential energy both repeat after a period T/2. The total energy remains constant at all t or x. 2024-25  PHYSICS 270 let it go

. The kinetic energy and potential energy both repeat after a period T/2. The total energy remains constant at all t or x. 2024-25  PHYSICS 270 let it go. The stone executes a to and fro motion, it is periodic with a period of about two seconds. We shall show that this periodic motion is simple harmonic for small displacements fromOrcos (7.07 t) = 0.5 and hence sin (7.07 t)  =3 2  = 0.866 Then, the velocity of the block at x = 5 cm is       = 0.1  × 7.07 × 0.866 m s–1           = 0.61 m s–1 Hence the K.E. of the block,   21 =  2  v m            = ½[1kg  × (0.6123 m s–1 )2 ]            = 0.19 J The P .E. of the block,    21 =  2x  k              = ½(50 N m–1 × 0.05 m  × 0.05 m)            = 0.0625 J The total energy of the block at x = 5 cm,            =  K.E. + P .E.            =  0.25 J we also know that at maximum  displacement, K.E. is zero and hence the total energy of the system is equal to the P .E. Ther efore, the total energy of the system,           = ½(50 N m–1 ×  0.1 m  × 0.1 m )           = 0

.E. is zero and hence the total energy of the system is equal to the P .E. Ther efore, the total energy of the system,           = ½(50 N m–1 ×  0.1 m  × 0.1 m )           = 0.25 J which is same as the sum of the two energies at a displacement of 5 cm. This is in conformity with the principle of conservation of energy.   ⊳ 13.8 The Simple Pendulum It is said that Galileo measured the periods of a swinging chandelier in a church by his pulse beats. He observed that the motion of the chandelier was periodic. The system is a kind of pendulum. Y ou can also make your own pendulum by tying a piece of stone to a long unstretchable thread , approximately 100 cm long.  Suspend your pendulum from a suitable support so that it is free to oscillate. Displace the stone to one side by a small distance and(a)  (b) Fig. 13.17 (a) A bob oscillating about its mean position. (b) The radial force T-mg cos θ provides centripetal force but no torque about the support. The tangential force mg sin θ provides the restoring torque

. (b) The radial force T-mg cos θ provides centripetal force but no torque about the support. The tangential force mg sin θ provides the restoring torque. the mean position. Consider simple pendulum — a small bob of mass m tied to an inextensible massless string of length L. The other end of the string is fixed to a rigid support. The bob oscillates in a plane about the vertical line through the support. Fig. 13.17(a) shows this system. Fig. 13.17(b) is a kind of ‘free-body’ diagram of the simple pendulum showing the forces acting on the bob. Let θ be the angle made by the string with the vertical. When the bob is at the mean position, θ = 0 There are only two forces acting on the bob; the tension T along the string and the vertical 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 271 force due to gravity (=mg). The force mg can be resolved into the component mg cosθ along the string and mg sin θ perpendicular to it

. The force mg can be resolved into the component mg cosθ along the string and mg sin θ perpendicular to it. Since the motion of the bob is along a circle of length L and centre at the support point, the bob has a radial acceleration ( ω2L) and also a tangental acceleration; the latter arises since motion along the arc of the circle is not uniform. The radial acceleration is provided by the net radial force T –mg cosθ, while the tangential acceleration is provided by mg sin θ. It is more convenient to work with torque about the support since the radial force gives zero torque. Torque τ about the support is entirely provided by the tangental component of force τ =  –L (mg sinθ) (13.19) This is the restoring torque that tends to reduce angular displacement — hence the negative sign. By Newton’s law of rotational motion, τ   =  I α (13.20) where I is the moment of inertia of the system about the support and α is the angular acceleration. Thus, I α = –m g sin θ   L (13.21) Or, α  =  sin  m g L  I θ − (13

.20) where I is the moment of inertia of the system about the support and α is the angular acceleration. Thus, I α = –m g sin θ   L (13.21) Or, α  =  sin  m g L  I θ − (13.22) We can simplify Eq. (13.22) if we assume that the displacement θ is small. W e know that sin θ can be expressed as, sin  ± ...3! 5!  θ θθ θ3 5   =  − + (13.23) where θ is in radians. Now if θ  is small, sin θ can be approximated by θ and Eq. (13.22) can then be written as,  α θ   =  −  mgL I (13.24) In Table 1 3.1, we have listed the angle θ in degrees, its equivalent in radians, and the value of the function sin θ . From this table it can be seen that for θ as large as 20 degrees, sin θ is nearly the same as θ expressed in radians .Table 13.1  sin θ θθ θθ as ma function of angle θ θθ θθ (degrees) (radians) sin Equation (13.24) is mathematically, identical to Eq. (13.11) except that the variable is angular displacement. Hence we have proved that for small q, the motion of the bob is simple harmonic. From Eqs. (13.24) and (13

. (13.11) except that the variable is angular displacement. Hence we have proved that for small q, the motion of the bob is simple harmonic. From Eqs. (13.24) and (13.11), ω  =  mgL I  and  IT  mgLπ  = 2       (13.25) Now since the string of the simple pendulum is massless, the moment of inertia I is simply mL2. Eq. (13.25) then gives the well-known formula for time period of a simple pendulum. LT  gπ  =  2     (13.26) uExample 13.8  What is the length of a simple pendulum, which ticks seconds ? Answer  From Eq. (13.26), the time period of a simple pendulum is given by,  LT  gπ  =  2    From this relation one gets, 2 2 4gTLπ  =    The time period of a simple pendulum, which ticks seconds, is 2 s. Therefore, for g = 9.8 m s–2 and T  = 2 s, L is –2 2 29.8(m s ) 4(s )  4   π× =     = 1 m ⊳ 2024-25  PHYSICS 272 SUMMARY 1. The motion that repeats itself is called periodlic motion. 2. The period T  is the time reequired for one complete oscillation, or cycle

. The motion that repeats itself is called periodlic motion. 2. The period T  is the time reequired for one complete oscillation, or cycle. It is related to the frequency v by, 1Tv= The frequency  ν of periodic or oscillatory motion is the number of oscillations per unit time. In the SI, it is measured in hertz :                       1 hertz = 1 Hz = 1 oscillation per second = 1s–1 3. In simple harmonic motion  (SHM), the displacement x (t) of a particle from its equilibrium position is given by, x (t)  = A cos ( ωt + φ ) (displacement), in which A  is the amplitude  of the displacement, the quantity  ( ωt + φ ) is the phase of the motion, and φ is the phase constant . The angular frequency  ω is related to the period and frequency of the motion by ,                          22     Tπω πν= = (angular frequency). 4. Simple harmonic motion can also be viewed as the projection of uniform circular motion on the diameter of the circle in which the latter motion occurs. 5

. 4. Simple harmonic motion can also be viewed as the projection of uniform circular motion on the diameter of the circle in which the latter motion occurs. 5. The particle velocity and acceleration during SHM as functions of time are given by, v (t)  =  – ωA sin ( ωt + φ )            (velocity),                         a (t)  =  – ω2A cos ( ωt + φ )                                 = –ω2x (t)                            (acceleration), Thus we see that both velocity and acceleration of a body executing simple harmonic motion are periodic functions, having the velocity amplitude  vm=ω A  and acceleration amplitude  am =ω2A, respectively. 6. The force acting in a simple harmonic motion is proportional to the displacement and is always directed towards the centre of motion. 7. A particle executing simple harmonic motion has, at any time, kinetic energy K = ½ mv2  and potential energy U = ½ kx2

. 7. A particle executing simple harmonic motion has, at any time, kinetic energy K = ½ mv2  and potential energy U = ½ kx2.  If no friction is present the mechanical energy of the system, E = K + U  always remains constant even though K and U change with time. 8. A particle of mass m oscillating under the influence of Hooke’s law restoring force given by F = – k x  exhibits simple harmonic motion with ω k m=(angular frequency) 2mT kπ= (period) Such a system is also called a linear oscillator . 9. The motion of a simple pendulum swinging through small angles is approximately simple harmonic. The period of oscillation is given by, 2LTgπ= 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 273 POINTS TO PONDER 1. The period T is the  least time after which motion repeats itself.  Thus, motion repeats itself after nT wher e n is an integer . 2. Every periodic motion is not simple harmonic motion. Only that periodic motion governed by the force law F = – k x is simple harmonic. 3

. 2. Every periodic motion is not simple harmonic motion. Only that periodic motion governed by the force law F = – k x is simple harmonic. 3. Circular motion can arise due to an inverse-square law force (as in planetary motion) as well as due to simple har monic for ce in two dimensions equal to: – mω2r.  In the latter case, the phases of motion, in two perpendicular directions ( x and y) must differ by π/2. Thus, for example, a particle subject to a force  – mω2r with initial position (0, A) and velocity ( ωA, 0) will move uniformly in a circle of radius A. 4. For linear simple harmonic motion with a given ω, two initial conditions are necessary and sufficient to determine the motion completely.  The  initial  conditions may be (i) initial position and initial velocity or (ii) amplitude and phase or (iii) energy and phase. 5. From point 4 above, given  amplitude or energy, phase of motion is determined by the initial position or initial velocity. 6

. 5. From point 4 above, given  amplitude or energy, phase of motion is determined by the initial position or initial velocity. 6. A combination of two simple harmonic motions with arbitrary amplitudes and phases is not necessarily periodic.  It is periodic only if frequency of one motion is an integral multiple of the other’s fr equency.  However , a periodic motion can always be expr essed as a sum of infinite number of harmonic motions with appropriate amplitudes. 7. The period of SHM does not depend on amplitude or energy or the phase constant. Contrast this with the periods of planetary orbits under gravitation (Kepler’s third law). 8. The motion of a simple pendulum is simple harmonic for small angular displacement. 9

. Contrast this with the periods of planetary orbits under gravitation (Kepler’s third law). 8. The motion of a simple pendulum is simple harmonic for small angular displacement. 9. For motion of a particle to be simple harmonic, its displacement x must be expressible in either of the following forms : x = A  cos ωt  +  B sin ωt x = A cos ( ωt + α), x =  B sin ( ωt + β) The three forms are completely equivalent (any one can be expressed in terms of any other two forms). Thus, damped simple harmonic motion is not strictly simple harmonic. It is approximately so only for time intervals much less than 2m/b  where b is the damping constant. 2024-25  PHYSICS 274 Exercises 13.1 Which of the following examples represent periodic motion? (a) A swimmer completing one (return) trip from one bank of a river to the other and back. (b) A freely suspended bar magnet displaced from its N-S direction and released. (c) A hydrogen molecule rotating about its cent re of mass. (d) An arrow released from a bow. 13

. (b) A freely suspended bar magnet displaced from its N-S direction and released. (c) A hydrogen molecule rotating about its cent re of mass. (d) An arrow released from a bow. 13.2 Which of the following examples represent (nearly) simple harmonic motion and which represent periodic but not simple harmonic motion? (a) the rotation of earth about its axis. (b) motion of an oscillating mercury column in a U-tube. (c) motion of a ball bearing inside a smooth curved bowl, when released from a point slightly above the lower most point. (d) general vibrations of a polyatomic molecule about its equilibrium position. 13.3 Fig. 13.18 depicts four x-t plots for linear motion of a particle. Which of the plots represent periodic motion? What is the period of motion (in case of periodic motion) ? Fig. 18.18 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 275 13

. Which of the plots represent periodic motion? What is the period of motion (in case of periodic motion) ? Fig. 18.18 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 275 13.4 Which of the following functions of time represent (a) simple harmonic, (b) periodic but not simple harmonic, and (c) non-periodic motion? Give period for each case of periodic motion ( ω is any positive constant): (a) sin ωt – cos ωt (b) sin3 ωt (c) 3 cos ( π/4 – 2 ωt) (d) cos ωt + cos 3 ωt + cos 5 ωt (e) exp (– ω2t2) (f) 1 + ωt + ω2t2 13.5 A particle is in linear simple harmonic motion between two points, A and B, 10 cm apart. Take the direction from A to B as the positive direction and give the signs of velocity, acceleration and force on the particle when it is (a) at the end A, (b) at the end B, (c) at the mid-point of AB going towards A, (d) at 2 cm away from B going towards A, (e) at 3 cm away from A going towards B, and (f) at 4 cm away from B going towards A. 13

. 13.6 Which of the following relationships between the acceleration a and the displacement x of a particle involve simple harmonic motion? (a) a = 0.7 x (b) a = –200 x2 (c) a = –10 x (d) a = 100 x3 13.7 The motion of a particle executing simple harmonic motion is described by the displacement function,                  x(t) = A cos ( ωt + φ ). If the initial ( t = 0) position of the particle is 1 cm and its initial velocity is ω cm/s, what are its amplitude and initial phase angle ? The angular frequency of the particle is π s–1. If instead of the cosine function, we choose the sine function to describe the SHM : x = B sin  (ωt + α), what are the amplitude and initial phase of the particle with the above initial conditions. 13.8 A spring balance has a scale that reads from 0 to 50 kg. The length of the scale is 20 cm. A body suspended from this balance, when displaced and released, oscillates with a period of 0.6 s. What is the weight of the body ? 13

. The length of the scale is 20 cm. A body suspended from this balance, when displaced and released, oscillates with a period of 0.6 s. What is the weight of the body ? 13.9 A spring having with a spring constant 1200 N m–1 is mounted on a horizontal table as shown in Fig. 13.19. A mass of 3 kg is attached to the free end of the spring. The mass is then pulled sideways to a distance of 2.0 cm and released. Fig. 13.19 Determine (i) the frequency of oscillations, (ii)  maximum acceleration of the mass, and (iii) the maximum speed of the mass. 2024-25  PHYSICS 276 13.10 In Exercise 13.9, let us take the position of mass when the spring is unstreched as x = 0, and the direction from left to right as the positive direction of x-axis. Give x as a function of time t for the oscillating mass if at the moment we start the stopwatch ( t = 0), the mass is (a) at the mean position, (b) at the maximum stretched position, and (c) at the maximum compressed position

. In what way do these functions for SHM dif fer fr om each other , in fr equency, in amplitude or the initial phase? 13.11 Figures 13.20 correspond to two circular motions. The radius of the circle, the period of revolution, the initial position, and the sense of revolution (i.e. clockwise or anti-clockwise) are indicated on each figure. Fig. 13.20 Obtain the corresponding simple harmonic motions of the x-projection of the radius vector of the r evolving particle P , in each case. 13.12 Plot the corresponding reference circle for each of the following simple harmonic motions. Indicate the initial ( t =0) position of the particle, the radius of the circle, and the angular speed of the rotating particle. For simplicity, the sense of rotation may be fixed to be anticlockwise in every case: ( x is in cm and t is in s). (a) x = –2 sin (3 t + π/3) (b) x = cos ( π/6 – t) (c) x = 3 sin (2 πt + π/4) (d) x = 2 cos πt 13.13 Figure 13

. (a) x = –2 sin (3 t + π/3) (b) x = cos ( π/6 – t) (c) x = 3 sin (2 πt + π/4) (d) x = 2 cos πt 13.13 Figure 13.21(a) shows a spring of force constant k clamped rigidly at one end and a mass m attached to its free end. A force F applied at the free end stretches the spring. Figure 13.21 (b) shows the same spring with both ends free and attached to a mass m at either end. Each end of the spring in Fig. 13.21(b) is stretched by the same for ce F. Fig. 13.21 (a) What is the maximum extension of the spring in the two cases ? (b) If the mass in Fig. (a) and the two masses in Fig. (b) are released, what is the period of oscillation in each case ? 2024-25  OSCILLATIONS 277 13.14 The piston in the cylinder head of a locomotive has a stroke (twice the amplitude) of 1.0 m. If the piston moves with simple harmonic motion with an angular frequency of 200 rad/min, what is its maximum speed ? 13.15 The acceleration due to gravity on the surface of moon is 1.7 m s–2

.0 m. If the piston moves with simple harmonic motion with an angular frequency of 200 rad/min, what is its maximum speed ? 13.15 The acceleration due to gravity on the surface of moon is 1.7 m s–2. What is the time period of a simple pendulum on the surface of moon if its time period on the surface of earth is 3.5 s ? ( g onthe surface of earth is 9.8 m s–2) 13.16 A simple pendulum of length l and having a bob of mass M is suspended in a car . The car is moving on a circular track of radius R with a uniform speed v. If the pendulum makes small oscillations in a radial direction about its equilibrium position, what will be its time period ? 13.17 A cylindrical piece of cork of density of base area A and height h floats in a liquid of density ρl. The cork is depressed slightly and then released. Show that the cork oscillates up and down simple harmonically with a period                                      Th g1=2πρ ρ where ρ is the density of cork. (Ignore damping due to viscosity of the liquid). 13

. (Ignore damping due to viscosity of the liquid). 13.18 One end of a U-tube containing mercury is connected to a suction pump and the other end to atmosphere. A small pressure difference is maintained between the two columns. Show that, when the suction pump is removed, the column of mercury in the U-tube executes simple harmonic motion. 2024-25  CHAPTER  FOURTEEN WAVES 14.1 INTRODUCTION In the pr evious Chapter , we studied the motion of objects oscillating in isolation. What happens in a system, which is a collection of such objects? A material medium provides such an example. Here, elastic forces bind the constituents to each other and, therefore, the motion of one affects that of the other . If you dr op a little pebble in a pond of still water , the water surface gets disturbed. The disturbance does not remain confined to one place, but propagates outward along a circle

. If you dr op a little pebble in a pond of still water , the water surface gets disturbed. The disturbance does not remain confined to one place, but propagates outward along a circle. If you continue dropping pebbles in the pond, you see circles rapidly moving outward from the point where the water surface is disturbed. It gives a feeling as if the water is moving outward from the point of disturbance. If you put some cork pieces on the disturbed surface, it is seen that the cork pieces move up and down but do not move away from the centre of disturbance. This shows that the water mass does not flow outward with the circles, but rather a moving disturbance is created. Similarly, when we speak, the sound moves outward from us, without any flow of air from one part of the medium to another . The disturbances produced in air are much less obvious and only our ears or a microphone can detect them. These patterns, which move without the actual physical transfer or flow of matter as a whole, ar e called waves

. These patterns, which move without the actual physical transfer or flow of matter as a whole, ar e called waves . In this Chapter , we will study such waves. Waves transport ener gy and the patter n of disturbance has information that pr opagate fr om one point to another . All our communications essentially depend on transmission of sig- nals through waves. Speech means production of sound waves in air and hearing amounts to their detection. Often, communication involves different kinds of waves. For exam- ple, sound waves may be first converted into an electric cur - rent signal which in turn may generate an electromagnetic wave that may be transmitted by an optical cable or via a14.1 Introduction 14.2 Transverse and longitudinal waves 14.3 Displacement relation in a progressive wave 14.4 The speed of a travelling wave 14.5 The principle of superposition of waves 14.6 Reflection of waves 14.7 Beats Summary Points to ponder Exercises 2024-25  WAVES 279 satellite

.4 The speed of a travelling wave 14.5 The principle of superposition of waves 14.6 Reflection of waves 14.7 Beats Summary Points to ponder Exercises 2024-25  WAVES 279 satellite. Detection of the original signal will usu- ally involve these steps in r everse or der. Not all waves require a medium for their propagation. W e know that light waves can travel through vacuum. The light emitted by stars, which are hundreds of light years away, reaches us thr ough inter -stellar space, which is practically a vacuum. The most familiar type of waves such as waves on a string, water waves, sound waves, seismic waves, etc. is the so-called mechanical waves. These waves require a medium for propagation, they cannot propagate through vacuum. They involve oscillations of constituent particles and depend on the elastic properties of the medium. The electromagnetic waves that you will learn in Class XII are a different type of wave. Electromagnetic waves do not necessarily require a medium - they can travel through vacuum

. The electromagnetic waves that you will learn in Class XII are a different type of wave. Electromagnetic waves do not necessarily require a medium - they can travel through vacuum. Light, radiowaves, X-rays, are all electromagnetic waves. In vacuum, all electromagnetic waves have the same speed c, whose value is : c = 299, 792, 458 ms–1. (14.1) A third kind of wave is the so-called Matter waves. They are associated with constituents of matter : electrons, protons, neutrons, atoms and molecules. They arise in quantum mechanical description of nature that you will learn in your later studies. Though conceptually more abstract than mechanical or electro-magnetic waves, they have already found applications in several devices basic to modern technology; matter waves associated with electrons are employed in electron microscopes. In this chapter we will study mechanical waves, which require a material medium for their propagation

. In this chapter we will study mechanical waves, which require a material medium for their propagation. The aesthetic influence of waves on art and literature is seen from very early times; yet the first scientific a nalysis of wave motion dates back to the seventeenth century. Some of the famous scientists associated with the physics of wave motion are Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695), Robert Hooke and Isaac Newton. The understanding of physics of waves followed the physics of oscillations of masses tied to springs and physics of the simple pendulum. W aves in elastic media are intimately connected with harmonic oscillations. (Stretched strings, coiled springs, air , etc., ar e examples of elastic media).We shall illustrate this connection thr ough simple examples. Consider a collection of springs connected to one another as shown in Fig. 14.1. If the spring at one end is pulled suddenly and released, the disturbance travels to the other end

. Consider a collection of springs connected to one another as shown in Fig. 14.1. If the spring at one end is pulled suddenly and released, the disturbance travels to the other end. What has happened? The first spring is disturbed from its equilibrium length. Since the second spring is connected to the first, it is also stretched or compressed, and so on. The dist urbance moves from one end to the other; but each spring only executes small oscillations about its equilibrium position. As a practical example of this situation, consider a stationary train at a railway station. Different bogies of the train are coupled to each other through a spring coupling. When an engine is attached at one end, it gives a push to the bogie next to it; this push is transmitted from one bogie to another without the entire train being bodily displaced. Now let us consider the propagation of sound waves in air . As the wave passes thr ough air , it compr esses or expands a small r egion of air

. Now let us consider the propagation of sound waves in air . As the wave passes thr ough air , it compr esses or expands a small r egion of air . This causes a change in the density of that region, say δρ, this change induces a change in pr essur e, δp, in that region. Pressure is force per unit area, so there is a restoring force  proportional  to the disturbance, just like in a spring. In this case, the quantity similar to extension or compression of the spring is the change in density. If a region is compressed, the molecules in that r egion ar e packed together , and they tend to move out to the adjoining region, thereby increasing the density or creating compression in the adjoining region. Consequently, the air in the fir st region undergoes rarefaction. If a region is comparatively rarefied the surrounding air will rush in making the rarefaction move to the adjoining region

. Consequently, the air in the fir st region undergoes rarefaction. If a region is comparatively rarefied the surrounding air will rush in making the rarefaction move to the adjoining region. Thus, the compression or rarefaction moves fr om one r egion to another , making the propagation of a disturbance possible in air .Fig. 14.1 A collection of springs connected to each other . The end A is pulled suddenly generating a disturbance, which then propagates to the other end. 2024-25  PHYSICS 280 In solids, similar arguments can be made. In a crystalline solid, atoms or group of atoms are arranged in a periodic lattice. In these, each atom or group of atoms is in equilibrium, due to forces from the surrounding atoms. Displacing one atom, keeping the others fixed, leads to restoring forces, exactly as in a spring. So we can think of atoms in a lattice as end points, with springs between pairs of them. In the subsequent sections of this chapter we are going to discuss various characteristic properties of waves. 14

. In the subsequent sections of this chapter we are going to discuss various characteristic properties of waves. 14.2 TRANSVERSE AND LONGITUDINAL WAVES We have seen that motion of mechanical waves involves oscillations of constituents of the medium. If the constituents of the medium oscillate perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation, we call the wave a transverse wave. If they oscillate along the direction of wave propagation, we call the wave a longitudinal wave. Fig.14.2 shows the propagation of a single pulse along a string, resulting from a single up and down jerk. If the string is very long comparedposition as the pulse or wave passes through them. The oscillations are normal to the direction of wave motion along the string, so this is an example of transverse wave. We can look at a wave in two ways. W e can fix an instant of time and picture the wave in space. This will give us the shape of the wave as a whole in space at a given instant. Another way is to fix a location i.e

. W e can fix an instant of time and picture the wave in space. This will give us the shape of the wave as a whole in space at a given instant. Another way is to fix a location i.e. fix our attention on a particular element of string and see its oscillatory motion in time. Fig. 14.4 describes the situation for longitudinal waves in the most familiar example of the propagation of sound waves. A long pipe filled with air has a piston at one end. A single sudden push forward and pull back of the piston will generate a pulse of condensations (higher density) and rarefactions (lower density) in the medium (air). If the  push-pull of the piston is continuous and periodic (sinusoidal), aFig. 14.3 A harmonic (sinusoidal) wave travelling along a stretched string is an example of a transverse wave. An element of the string in the region of the wave oscillates about its equilibrium position perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. Fig. 14

. An element of the string in the region of the wave oscillates about its equilibrium position perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. Fig. 14.2 When a pulse travels along the length of a stretched string (x-direction), the elements of the string oscillate up and down (y- direction) to the size of the pulse, the pulse will damp out before it reaches the other end and reflection from that end may be ignored. Fig. 14.3 shows a similar situation, but this time the external agent gives a continuous periodic sinusoidal up and down jerk to one end of the string. The resulting disturbance on the string is then a sinusoidal wave. In either case the elements of the string oscillate about their equilibrium meanFig. 14.4 Longitudinal waves (sound) generated in a pipe filled with air by moving the piston up and down. A volume element of air oscillates in the direction parallel to the direction of wave propagation

.4 Longitudinal waves (sound) generated in a pipe filled with air by moving the piston up and down. A volume element of air oscillates in the direction parallel to the direction of wave propagation. 2024-25  WAVES 281 sinusoidal wave will be generated propagating in air along the length of the pipe. This is clearly an example of longitudinal waves. The waves considered above, transverse or longitudinal, are travelling or progressive waves since they travel from one part of the medium to another . The material medium as a whole does not move, as already noted. A stream, for example, constitutes motion of water as a whole. In a water wave, it is the disturbance that moves, not water as a whole. Likewise a wind (motion of air as a whole) should not be confused with a sound wave which is a propagation of disturbance (in pr essur e density) in air , without the motion of air medium as a whole. In transverse waves, the particle motion is normal to the direction of propagation of the wave

. In transverse waves, the particle motion is normal to the direction of propagation of the wave. Therefore, as the wave propagates, each element of the medium undergoes a shearing strain. Transverse waves can, therefore, be propagated only in those media, which can sustain shearing stress, such as solids and not in fluids. Fluids, as well as, solids can sustain compressive strain; therefore, longitudinal waves can be propagated in all elastic media. For example, in medium like steel, both transverse and longitudinal waves can propagate, while air can sustain only longitudinal waves. The waves on the surface of water are of two kinds: capillary waves  and gravity waves . The former are ripples of fairly short wavelength —not more than a few centimetre —and the restoring force that produces them is the sur face tension of water . Gravity waves have wavelengths typically ranging from several metres to several hundred meters

. Gravity waves have wavelengths typically ranging from several metres to several hundred meters. The restoring force that produces these waves is the pull of gravity, which tends to keep the water surface at its lowest level. The oscillations of the particles in these waves are not confined to the surface only, but extend with diminishing amplitude to the very bottom. The particle motion in water waves involves a complicated motion —they not only move up and down but also back and forth. The waves in an ocean are the combination of both longitudinal and transverse waves. It is found that, generally, transverse and longitudinal waves travel with different speed in the same medium.u uuuuExample  14.1  Given below are some examples of wave motion. State in each case if the wave motion is transverse, longitudinal or a combination of both: (a)Motion of a kink in a long itudinal  spring produced by displacing one end of the spring sideways

. State in each case if the wave motion is transverse, longitudinal or a combination of both: (a)Motion of a kink in a long itudinal  spring produced by displacing one end of the spring sideways. (b)Waves pr oduced in a cylinder containing a liquid by moving its piston back and forth. (c)Waves pr oduced by a motorboat sailing in water . (d)Ultrasonic waves in air produced by a vibrating quartz crystal. Answer (a)Transverse and longitudinal (b)Longitudinal (c)Transverse and longitudinal (d)Longitudinal ⊳ 14.3 DISPLACEMENT RELATION IN A  PROGRESSIVE WAVE For mathematical description of  a travelling wave, we need a function of both position x and time t. Such a function at every instant should give the shape of the wave at that instant. Also, at every given location, it should describe the motion of the constituent of the medium at that location. If we wish to describe a sinusoidal travelling wave (such as the one shown in Fig. 14.3) the corresponding function must also be sinusoidal

. If we wish to describe a sinusoidal travelling wave (such as the one shown in Fig. 14.3) the corresponding function must also be sinusoidal. For convenience, we shall take the wave to be transverse so that if the position of the constituents of the medium is denoted by x, the displacement from the equilibrium position may be denoted by y. A sinusoidal travelling wave is then described by: ( , ) sin( )= −ω +φy xt a kx t (14.2) The term φ in the argument of sine function means equivalently that we are considering a linear combination of sine and cosine functions: ( , ) sin( ) cos( )y x t A kx t B kx t ω ω = − + − (14.3) From Equations (14.2) and (14.3), 2 2a A B= + and  1tanφ−=B A   To understand why Equation (14.2) represents a sinusoidal travelling wave, take a fixed instant,  say t = t0. Then, the argument of the sine function in Equation (14.2) is simply 2024-25  PHYSICS 282 kx + constant. Thus, the shape of the wave (at any fixed instant) as a function of x is a sine wave

. Then, the argument of the sine function in Equation (14.2) is simply 2024-25  PHYSICS 282 kx + constant. Thus, the shape of the wave (at any fixed instant) as a function of x is a sine wave. Similarly, take a fixed location, say x = x0. Then, the argument of the sine function in Equation (14.2) is constant - ωt. The displacement y, at a fixed location, thus, varies sinusoidally with time. That is, the constituents of the medium at different positions execute simple harmonic motion. Finally, as t increases, x must increase in the positive direction to keep kx – ωt + φ  constant. Thus, Eq. (14.2) represents a sinusiodal (harmonic) wave travelling along the positive direction of the x-axis. On the other hand, a function ( , ) sin( )= +ω +φy xt a kx t  (14.4) represents a wave travelling in the negative direction of x-axis. Fig. (14.5) gives the names of the various physical quantities appearing in Eq. (14.2) that we now interpret.     Fig. 1 4.6 shows the plots of Eq. (1 4

. Fig. (14.5) gives the names of the various physical quantities appearing in Eq. (14.2) that we now interpret.     Fig. 1 4.6 shows the plots of Eq. (1 4.2) for different values of time differing by equal intervals of time. In a wave, the crest is the point of maximum positive displacement, the trough is the point of maximum negative displacement. To see how a wave travels, we can fix attention on a crest and see how it progresses with time. In the figure, this is shown by a cross (×) on the crest. In the same manner , we can see the motion of a particular constituent of the medium at a fixed location, say at the origin of the x-axis. This is shown by a solid dot (•) . The plots of Fig. 1 4.6 show that with time, the solid dot (•) at the origin moves periodically , i.e., the particle at the origin oscillates about its mean position as the wave progresses. This is true for any other location also

.e., the particle at the origin oscillates about its mean position as the wave progresses. This is true for any other location also. W e also see that during the time the solid dot (•) has completed one full oscillation, the crest has moved further by a certain distance.Using the plots of Fig. 14.6, we now define the various quantities of Eq. (14.2). 14.3.1  Amplitude  and Phase In Eq. (14.2), since the sine function varies between 1 and –1, the displacement y (x,t) varies between a and – a. We can take a to be a positive constant, without any loss of generality. Then, a represents the maximum displacement of the constituents of the medium from their equilibrium position. Note that the displacement y may be positive or negative, but a is positive. It is called the amplitude  of the wave. The quantity ( kx – ωt + φ) appearing as the argument of the sine function in Eq. (1 4.2) is called the phase of the wave

. It is called the amplitude  of the wave. The quantity ( kx – ωt + φ) appearing as the argument of the sine function in Eq. (1 4.2) is called the phase of the wave. Given the amplitude a, the phase determines the displacement of the wave at any position and at any instant. Clearly φ is the phase at x = 0 and t = 0. Hence , φ is called the initial phase angle. By suitable choice of origin on the x-axis and the intial time, it is possible to have φ = 0. Thus there is no loss of generality in dropping φ, i.e., in taking Eq. (1 4.2) with φ = 0.Fig. 14.5 The meaning of standard symbols in Eq. (14.2)y(x,t) :displacement as a function of position x and time t a :amplitude of a wave ω :angular frequency of the wave k :angular wave number kx–ωt+φ:initial phase angle ( a+x = 0, t = 0)Fig. 14.6 A harmonic wave progressing along the positive direction of x-axis at different times. 2024-25  WAVES 283 14.3

. 14.6 A harmonic wave progressing along the positive direction of x-axis at different times. 2024-25  WAVES 283 14.3.2  Wavelength and Angular Wave Number The minimum distance between two points having the same phase is called the wavelength of the wave, usually denoted by λ. For simplicity, we can choose points of the same phase to be crests or troughs. The wavelength is then the distance between two consecutive crests or troughs in a wave. Taking  φ = 0 in Eq. (14.2), the displacement at  t = 0 is given by ( ,0) sin=y x a kx      (14.5) Since the sine function repeats its value after every 2 π change in angle, That is the displacements at points x and at 2nxkπ+ are the same, where n=1,2,3,... The 1east distance between points with the same displacement (at any given instant of time) is obtained by taking n = 1. λ is then given by 2 kπλ=      or   2kπ λ=     (14.6) k is the angular wave number or propagation constant; its SI unit is radian per metre or 1 radm−* 14.3

. λ is then given by 2 kπλ=      or   2kπ λ=     (14.6) k is the angular wave number or propagation constant; its SI unit is radian per metre or 1 radm−* 14.3.3 Period, Angular Frequency and Frequency Fig. 14.7 shows again a sinusoidal plot. It describes not the shape of the wave at a certain instant but the displacement of an element (at any fixed location) of the medium as a function of time. W e may for , simplicity, take Eq. (14.2) with φ = 0 and monitor the motion of the element say at 0x=. We then get (0, ) sin( )y t a t ω = −    sina tω = −Now, the period of oscillation of the wave is the time it takes for an element to complete one full oscillation. That is sin sin ( T)a t a tω ω− = − +    sin( T)a tω ω = − + Since sine function repeats after every 2π, T 2ω π=   or   2 Tπω= (14.7) ω is called the angular frequency of the wave. Its SI unit is rad s –1. The frequency ν is the number of oscillations per second. Therefore, 1 T 2ωνπ= =  (14.8) ν is usually measured in hertz

.7) ω is called the angular frequency of the wave. Its SI unit is rad s –1. The frequency ν is the number of oscillations per second. Therefore, 1 T 2ωνπ= =  (14.8) ν is usually measured in hertz. In the discussion above, reference has always been made to a wave travelling along a string or a transverse wave. In a longitudinal wave, the displacement of an element of the medium is parallel to the direction of propagation of the wave. In Eq. (14.2), the displacement function for a longitudinal wave is written as, s(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + φ) (14.9) where s(x, t) is the displacement of an element of the medium in the direction of propagation of the wave at position x and time t. In Eq. (1 4.9), a is the displacement amplitude;  other quantities have the same meaning as in case of a transverse wave except that the displacement function y (x, t) is to be replaced by the function  s (x, t). *Here again, ‘radian’ could be dropped and the units could be written merely as m–1

. *Here again, ‘radian’ could be dropped and the units could be written merely as m–1. Thus, k represents 2 π times the number of waves (or the total phase difference) that can be accommodated per unit length, with SI units m–1.Fig. 14.7 An element of a string at a fixed location oscillates in time with amplitude a and period T , as the wave passes over it. 2024-25  PHYSICS 284 u uu uuExample 14.2   A wave travelling along a string is described by, y(x, t)  = 0.005 sin (80.0 x – 3.0 t), in which the numerical constants are in SI units (0.005 m, 80.0 rad m–1, and 3.0 rad s–1). Calculate (a) the amplitude, (b) the wavelength, and (c) the period and frequency of the wave. Also, calculate the displacement y of the wave  at a distance x = 30.0 cm and time t = 20 s ? Answer   On comparing this displacement equation with Eq. (14.2), y (x, t) = a sin (kx –  ωt), we find (a)the amplitude of the wave is 0.005 m  = 5 mm. (b)the angular wave number k and angular frequency ω are k = 80.0  m–1 and ω = 3

. (14.2), y (x, t) = a sin (kx –  ωt), we find (a)the amplitude of the wave is 0.005 m  = 5 mm. (b)the angular wave number k and angular frequency ω are k = 80.0  m–1 and ω = 3.0 s–1 We, then, r elate the wavelength λ to k through Eq. (14.6), λ = 2π/k    180.0 m2π −= =  7.85 cm (c)Now, we relate T to ω by the relation T = 2π/ω                    13.0 s2π −=                     = 2.09 s and frequency, v  = 1/T = 0.48 Hz The displacement y at x = 30.0 cm and time t = 20 s is given by y  = (0.005 m) sin (80.0  × 0.3 – 3.0  × 20)             = (0.005 m) sin (–36 + 12 π)  = (0.005 m) sin (1.699)             = (0.005 m) sin (970) j 5 mm  ⊳ 14.4   THE SPEED OF A TRAVELLING WAVE To determine the speed of propagation of a travelling wave, we can fix our attention on any particular point on the wave (characterised by some value of the phase) and see how that point moves in time. It is convenient to look at the motion of the crest of the wave. Fig. 14

. It is convenient to look at the motion of the crest of the wave. Fig. 14.8 givesthe shape of the wave at two instants of time, which differ by a small time internal ∆t. The entire wave pattern is seen to shift to the right (positive direction of x-axis) by a distance ∆x. In particular , the cr est shown by a dot  (•) moves a distance ∆x in time ∆t. The speed of the wave is then ∆x/∆t. We can put the dot ( •) on a point with any other phase. It will move with the same speed v (otherwise the wave pattern will not remain fixed). The motion of a fixed phase point on the wave is given by kx – ωt = constant (14.10) Thus, as time t changes, the position x of the fixed phase point must change so that the phase remains constant. Thus, kx – ωt = k(x+∆x) – ω(t+∆t) ork ∆x – ω ∆t =0 Taking ∆x, ∆t vanishingly small, this gives ω = = d dxv t k(14.11) Relating ω  to T and k to λ, we get 2 2 /πν λλνπ λ= = =vT(14.12) Eq. (1 4

. Thus, kx – ωt = k(x+∆x) – ω(t+∆t) ork ∆x – ω ∆t =0 Taking ∆x, ∆t vanishingly small, this gives ω = = d dxv t k(14.11) Relating ω  to T and k to λ, we get 2 2 /πν λλνπ λ= = =vT(14.12) Eq. (1 4.12), a general relation for all progressive waves, shows that in the time required for one full oscillation by any constituent of the medium, the wave pattern travels a distance equal to the wavelength of the wave. It should be noted that the speed of a mechanical wave is determined by the inertial (linear mass density for strings, mass density in general) and elastic pr operties (Y oung’s modulus for linear media/ shear modulus, bulk modulus) of the medium. The medium determinesFig. 14.8 Progression of a harmonic wave from time t  to t + ∆t. where ∆t is a small interval. The wave pattern as a whole shifts to the right. The crest of the wave (or a point with any fixed phase) moves right by the distance ∆x in time ∆t. 2024-25  WAVES 285 the speed; Eq. (1 4.12) then relates wavelength to frequency for the given speed

. The crest of the wave (or a point with any fixed phase) moves right by the distance ∆x in time ∆t. 2024-25  WAVES 285 the speed; Eq. (1 4.12) then relates wavelength to frequency for the given speed. Of course, as remarked earlier , the medium can support both transverse and longitudinal waves, which will have different speeds in the same medium. Later in this chapter , we shall obtain specific expr essions for the speed of mechanical waves in some media. 14.4.1 Speed of a Transverse Wave on Stretched String The speed of a mechanical wave is determined by the restoring force setup in the medium when it is disturbed and the inertial properties (mass density) of the medium. The speed is expected to be directly related to the former and inversely to the latter . For waves on a string, the r estoring force is provided by the tension T in the string. The inertial property will in this case be linear mass density µ, which is mass m  of the string divided by its length L

. The inertial property will in this case be linear mass density µ, which is mass m  of the string divided by its length L. Using Newton’s Laws of Motion, an exact formula for the wave speed on a string can be derived, but this derivation is outside the scope of this book. W e shall, therefore, use dimensional analysis. W e already know that dimensional analysis alone can never yield the exact formula. The overall dimensionless constant is always left undetermined by dimensional analysis. The dimension of µ is [ML–1] and that of T is like for ce, namely [ML T–2]. We need to combine these dimensions to get the dimension of speed v [LT–1]. Simple inspection shows that the quantity T/µ has the relevant dimension [ ]2 2 2MLT L TML− −    =  Thus if T and µ are assumed to be the only relevant physical quantities, v  = C T µ(14.13) where C is the undetermined constant of dimensional analysis. In the exact formula, it turms out, C=1

.13) where C is the undetermined constant of dimensional analysis. In the exact formula, it turms out, C=1. The speed of transverse waves on a stretched string is given by v  = µT   (14.14) Note the important point that the speed v depends only on the properties of the medium T and µ (T is a property of the stretched stringarising due to an external force). It does not depend on wavelength or frequency of the wave itself. In higher studies, you will come across waves whose speed is not independent of frequency of the wave. Of the two parameters λ and ν the source of disturbance determines the frequency of the wave generated. Given the speed of the wave in the medium and the frequency Eq. (14.12) then fixes the wavelength vλν  = (14.15) uuuuuExample 14.3  A steel wire 0.72 m long has a mass of 5.0  ×10–3 kg. If the wire is under a tension of 60 N, what is the speed of transverse waves on the wire ? Answer  Mass per unit length of the wire, m  72 . 0kg  10 0 . 53−×=µ    = 6

.0  ×10–3 kg. If the wire is under a tension of 60 N, what is the speed of transverse waves on the wire ? Answer  Mass per unit length of the wire, m  72 . 0kg  10 0 . 53−×=µ    = 6.9  ×10–3 kg m–1 Tension, T = 60 N The speed of wave on the wire is given by  1 1 3m  93 m kg 10 9 . 6N  60 − − −= ×= = sT  vµ   ⊳ 14.4.2 Speed of a Longitudinal Wave (Speed of Sound) In a longitudinal wave, the constituents of the medium oscillate forward and backward in the direction of pr opagation of the wave. W e have already seen that the sound waves travel in the form of compressions and rarefactions of small volume elements of air .  The elastic pr operty that determines the stress under compressional strain is the bulk modulus of the medium defined by (see Chapter 8) PB  V/VΔ= −Δ(14.16) Here, the change in pressure ∆P produces a volumetric strain V VΔ . B has the same dimension as pressure and given in SI units in terms of pascal (Pa)

.16) Here, the change in pressure ∆P produces a volumetric strain V VΔ . B has the same dimension as pressure and given in SI units in terms of pascal (Pa). The inertial property relevant for the propagation of wave is the mass density ρ, with dimensions [ML–3]. Simple inspection reveals that quantity B/ρ has the relevant dimension: 2024-25  PHYSICS 286 2 2 2 2 3ML T L T ML− − − −  =   (14.17) Thus, if B and ρ are considered to be the only relevant physical quantities, v  = C B ρ(14.18) where, as before, C is the undetermined constant from dimensional analysis. The exact derivation shows that C=1. Thus, the general formula for longitudinal waves in a medium is: v  = B ρ(14.19) For a linear medium, like a solid bar , the lateral expansion of the bar is negligible and we may consider it to be only under longitudinal strain. In that case, the relevant modulus of elasticity is Y oung’s modulus, which has the same dimension as the Bulk modulus

. In that case, the relevant modulus of elasticity is Y oung’s modulus, which has the same dimension as the Bulk modulus. Dimensional analysis for this case is the same as before and yields a relation like Eq. (14.18), with an undetermined C, which the exact derivation shows to be unity. Thus, the speed of longitudinal waves in a solid bar is given by  v  = ρY(14.20) where Y is the Y oung’s modulus of the material of the bar . Table 14.1 gives the speed of sound in some media. Table 14.1 Speed of Sound in some Media   Liquids and solids generally have higher speed of sound than gases. [Note for solids, the speed being referred to is the speed of longitudinal waves in the solid]. This happens because they are much more difficult to compress than gases and so have much higher values of bulk modulus. Now, see Eq. (14.19). Solids and liquids have higher mass densities (ρ) than gases. But the corresponding increase in both the modulus (B) of solids and liquids is much higher

. Now, see Eq. (14.19). Solids and liquids have higher mass densities (ρ) than gases. But the corresponding increase in both the modulus (B) of solids and liquids is much higher . This is the reason why the sound waves travel faster in solids and liquids. We can estimate the speed of sound in a gas in the ideal gas approximation. For an ideal gas, the pr essur e P, volume V and temperatur e T ar e related by (see Chapter 10). PV = NkBT (14.21) where N is the number of molecules in volume V, kB is the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature of the gas (in Kelvin). Therefore, for an isothermal change it follows from Eq.(14.21) that V∆P + P ∆V  = 0 or PV/VP =∆∆− Hence, substituting in Eq. (14.16), we have B = P Therefore, from Eq. (14.19) the speed of a longitudinal wave in an ideal gas is given by, v  = ρP(14.22) This relation was first given by Newton and is known as Newton’s formula. u uu uuExample 14.4   Estimate the speed of sound in air at standard temperature and pressure. The mass of 1 mole of air is 29

. u uu uuExample 14.4   Estimate the speed of sound in air at standard temperature and pressure. The mass of 1 mole of air is 29.0×10–3 kg. Answer  We know that 1 mole of any gas occupies 22.4 litr es at STP . Ther efore, density of air at STP is:  ρo =(mass of one mole of air)/ (volume of one mole of air at STP) 3 3 329.0 10 kg 22.4 10 m − −×=× =  1.29 kg  m–3 2024-25  WAVES 287 According to Newton’s formula for the speed of sound in a medium, we get for the speed of sound in air at STP ,  = 280 m s–1   (14.23) ⊳ The result shown in Eq.(14.23) is about 15% smaller as compared to the experimental value of 331 m s–1 as given in Table 14.1. Where did w egowrong  ? Ifweexamin ethebasic assumption made by Newton that the pressure variations in a medium during propagation of sound are isothermal, we find that this is not correct. It was pointed out by Laplace that the pressure variations in the propagation of sound waves are so fast that there is little time for the heat flow to maintain constant temperature

. It was pointed out by Laplace that the pressure variations in the propagation of sound waves are so fast that there is little time for the heat flow to maintain constant temperature. These variations, therefore, are adiabatic and not isothermal. For adiabatic processes the ideal gas satisfies the relation (see Section 11.8), PVγ  = constant i.e. ∆(PVγ )  = 0 or Pγ V γ –1 ∆V + Vγ ∆P = 0 where γ is the ratio of two specific heats, Cp/Cv. Thus, for an ideal gas the adiabatic bulk modulus is given by, Bad =  V/VP ∆∆−   =  γP    The speed of sound is, therefore, from Eq. (14.19), give nby, v = ργP  (14.24) This modification of Newton’s formula is referred to as the Laplace  correction . For air γ = 7/5. Now using Eq. (1 4.24) to estimate the speed of sound in air at STP , we get a value 331.3 m s–1, which agrees with the measured speed. 14.5 THE PRINCIPLE OF SUPERPOSITION OF WAVES What happens when two wave pulses travelling in opposite directions cross each other (Fig. 14

.3 m s–1, which agrees with the measured speed. 14.5 THE PRINCIPLE OF SUPERPOSITION OF WAVES What happens when two wave pulses travelling in opposite directions cross each other (Fig. 14.9)? It turns out that wave pulses continue to retain their identities after they have crossed. However , during the time they overlap, the wave pattern is different from either of thepulses. Figure 14.9 shows the situation when two pulses of equal and opposite shapes move towar ds each other . When the pulses overlap, the resultant displacement is the algebraic sum of the displacement due to each pulse. This is known as the principle of superposition of waves. According to this principle, each pulse moves as if others are not present. The constituents of the medium, therefore, suffer displacments due to both and since the displacements can be positive and negative, the net displacement is an algebraic sum of the two. Fig. 14.9 gives graphs of the wave shape at different times

. Fig. 14.9 gives graphs of the wave shape at different times. Note the dramatic effect in the graph (c); the displacements due to the two pulses have exactly cancelled each other and there is zero displacement throughout.     To put the principle of superposition mathematically, let y1 (x,t) and y2 (x,t) be the displacements due to two wave disturbances in the medium. If the waves arrive in a region simultaneou sly, and therefore, overlap, the net displacement y (x,t) is given by y     (x, t) =  y1(x, t) +  y2(x, t) (14.25) If we have two or more waves moving in the medium the resultant waveform is the sum of wave functions of individual waves. That is, if the wave functions of the moving waves areFig. 14.9 Two pulses having equal and opposite displacements moving in opposite directions. The overlapping pulses add up to zero displacement in curve (c). 2024-25  PHYSICS 288 y1 = f1(x–vt), y2 = f2(x–vt), ..........            ..... ....

. The overlapping pulses add up to zero displacement in curve (c). 2024-25  PHYSICS 288 y1 = f1(x–vt), y2 = f2(x–vt), ..........            ..... .....            yn = fn (x–vt) thenthewavefunctio ndescribin gthe disturbance in the medium is y = f1(x – vt )+ f2(x – vt )+  ...+ fn(x – vt )    ( ) =1in  f  x vti= −∑ (14.26) The principle of superposition is basic to the phenomenon of interference. For simplicity, consider two harmonic travelling waves on a stretched string, both with the same ω (angular frequency) and k (wave number), and, therefore, the same wavelength λ. Their wave speed will be identical. Let us further assume that their amplitudes are equal and they are both travelling in the positive direction of x-axis. The waves only differ in their initial phase. According to Eq. (14.2), the two waves are described by the functions: y1(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt) (14.27) andy2(x, t) =  a sin (kx – ωt + φ ) (14

. The waves only differ in their initial phase. According to Eq. (14.2), the two waves are described by the functions: y1(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt) (14.27) andy2(x, t) =  a sin (kx – ωt + φ ) (14.28) The net displacement is then, by the principle of superposition, given by y  (x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt) + a sin (kx – ωt + φ) (14.29) ( )( )2sin cos2 2kx t kx taω ω φ φ   − + − +  =         (14.30) where we have used the familiar trignometric identity for sin sinA B+ . We then have ( ), 2 cos sin2 2y xt a kx tφ φω = − +  (14.31) Eq. (14.31) is also a harmonic travelling wave in the positive direction of x-axis, with the same frequency and wavelength. However , its initial phase angle is 2φ . The significant thing is that its amplitude is a function of the phase differenceφ between the constituent two waves: A(φ)  =  2a cos ½ φ (14.32) For φ = 0, when the waves are in phase, () ( ) , 2 siny xt a kx t ω = − (14.33) i.e., the resultant wave has amplitude 2a, the largest possible value for A

.32) For φ = 0, when the waves are in phase, () ( ) , 2 siny xt a kx t ω = − (14.33) i.e., the resultant wave has amplitude 2a, the largest possible value for A. For φ π=, the waves are completely, out of phase and the resultant wave has zero displacement everywhere at all times y   (x, t)  = 0 (14.34) Eq. (14.33) refers to the so-called constructive interference of the two waves where the amplitudes add up in the resultant wave. Eq. (14.34) is the case of destructive intereference where the amplitudes subtract out in the resultant wave. Fig. 14.10 shows these two cases of interference of waves arising from the principle of superposition. 14.6 REFLECTION OF WAVES So far we considered waves propagating in an unbounded medium. What happens if a pulse or a wave meets a boundary? If the boundary is rigid, the pulse or wave gets reflected. TheFig. 14.10 The resultant of two harmonic waves of equal amplitude and wavelength according to the principle of superposition

. TheFig. 14.10 The resultant of two harmonic waves of equal amplitude and wavelength according to the principle of superposition. The amplitude of the resultant wave depends on the phase difference φ, which is zero  for (a) and π for (b) 2024-25  WAVES 289 If on the other hand, the boundary point is not rigid but completely free to move (such as in the case of a string tied to a freely moving ring on a rod), the reflected pulse has the same phase and amplitude (assuming no energy dissipation) as the incident pulse. The net maximum displacement at the boundary is then twice the amplitude of each pulse. An example of non- rigid boundary is the open end of an organ pipe. To summarise, a travelling wave or pulse suffers a phase change of π on reflection at a rigid boundary and no phase change on reflection at an open boundary. To put this mathematically, let the incident travelling wave be () ( )2, sin ω = −y xt a kx t At a rigid boundary, the reflected wave is given by yr(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + π)

. To put this mathematically, let the incident travelling wave be () ( )2, sin ω = −y xt a kx t At a rigid boundary, the reflected wave is given by yr(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + π).    = – a sin (kx – ωt) (14.35) At an open boundary, the reflected wave is given by yr(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + 0).    = a sin (kx – ωt) (14.36) Clearly, at the rigid boundary, 2 0 = + =ry y y at all times. 14.6.1   Standing Waves and Normal Modes We consider ed above r eflection at one boundary. But there are familiar situations (a string fixed at either end or an air column in a pipe with either end closed) in which reflection takes place at two or more boundaries. In a string, for example, a wave travelling in one direction will get reflected at one end, which in turn will travel and get reflected from the other end. This will go on until there is a steady wave pattern set up on the string. Such wave patterns are called standing waves or stationary waves

. This will go on until there is a steady wave pattern set up on the string. Such wave patterns are called standing waves or stationary waves. To see this mathematically, consider a wave travelling along the positive direction of x-axis and a reflected wave of the same amplitude and wavelength in the negative direction of x-axis. From Eqs. (14.2) and (14.4), with φ = 0, we get: y1(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt) y2(x, t) = a sin (kx + ωt) The resultant wave on the string is, according to the principle of superposition: y (x, t) =  y1(x, t) + y2(x, t)phenomenon of echo is an example of reflection by a rigid boundary. If the boundary is not completely rigid or is an interface between two different elastic media, the situation is some what complicated. A part of the incident wave is reflected and a part is transmitted into the second medium.  If a wave is incident obliquely on the boundary between two different media the transmitted wave is called the refracted wave

.  If a wave is incident obliquely on the boundary between two different media the transmitted wave is called the refracted wave . The incident and refracted waves obey Snell’s law of refraction, and the incident and reflected waves obey the usual laws of reflection. Fig. 14.11 shows a pulse travelling along a stretched string and being reflected by the boundary. Assuming there is no absorption of energy by the boundary, the reflected wave has the same shape as the incident pulse but it suffers a phase change of π or 1800 on reflection. This is because the boundary is rigid and the disturbance must have zero displacement at all times at the boundary. By the principle of superposition, this is possible only if the reflected and incident waves differ by a phase of π, so that the resultant displacement is zero. This reasoning is based on boundary condition on a rigid wall. W e can arrive at the same conclusion dynamically also. As the pulse arrives at the wall, it exerts a force on the wall

. This reasoning is based on boundary condition on a rigid wall. W e can arrive at the same conclusion dynamically also. As the pulse arrives at the wall, it exerts a force on the wall. By Newton’s Third Law, the wall exerts an equal and opposite force on the string generating a reflected pulse that differs by a phase of π. Fig. 14.11  Reflection of a pulse meeting a rigid boundary. 2024-25  PHYSICS 290 = a [sin (kx – ωt) + sin (kx + ωt)] Using the familiar trignometric identity Sin (A+B) + Sin (A–B) = 2 sin A cosB we get, y (x, t) = 2a sin kx cos ωt (14.37) Note the important difference in the wave pattern described by Eq. (14.37) from that described by Eq. (14.2) or Eq. (14.4). The terms kx and ωt appear separately, not in the combination kx  - ωt. The amplitude of this wave is 2a sin kx. Thus, in this wave pattern, the amplitude varies from point-to-point, but each element of the string oscillates with the same angular frequency ω or time period

. Thus, in this wave pattern, the amplitude varies from point-to-point, but each element of the string oscillates with the same angular frequency ω or time period. There is no phase difference between oscillations of different elements of the wave. The string as a whole vibrates in phase with differing amplitudes at different points. The wave pattern is neither moving to the right nor to the left. Hence, they are called standing or stationary waves. The amplitude is fixed at a given location but, as remarked earlier , it is dif ferent at dif ferent locations. The points at which the amplitude is zero (i.e., where there is no motion at all) arenodes ; the points at which the amplitude is the largest are called antinodes.  Fig. 14.12 shows a stationary wave pattern resulting from superposition of two travelling waves in opposite directions. The most significant feature of stationary waves is that the boundary conditions constrain the possible wavelengths or frequencies of vibration of the system

. The most significant feature of stationary waves is that the boundary conditions constrain the possible wavelengths or frequencies of vibration of the system. The system cannot oscillate with any arbitrary frequency (contrast this with a harmonic travelling wave), but is characterised by a set of natural frequencies or normal modes  of oscillation. Let us determine these normal modes for a stretched string fixed at both ends. First, from Eq. (14.37), the positions of nodes (where the amplitude is zero) are given by sin kx = 0 . which implies kx = nπ;   n =  0, 1, 2, 3, ... Since, k = 2π/λ , we get x = λ 2n  ; n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...        (14.38) Fig. 14.12 Stationary waves arising from superposition of two harmonic waves travelling in opposite directions. Note that the positions of zero displacement (nodes) remain fixed at all times. 2024-25  WAVES 291 Clearly, the distance between any two successive nodes is λ 2

. Note that the positions of zero displacement (nodes) remain fixed at all times. 2024-25  WAVES 291 Clearly, the distance between any two successive nodes is λ 2. In the same way, the positions of antinodes (where the amplitude is the largest) are given by the largest value of sin kx : sin kx = 1 which implies kx = (n + ½) π ; n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ... With k = 2π/λ, we get  x = (n + ½)2λ ; n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...                (14.39) Again the distance between any two consecutive antinodes is 2λ. Eq. (14.38) can be applied to the case of a stretched string of length L fixed at both ends. Taking one end to be at x = 0, the boundary conditions are that x = 0 and x = L are positions of nodes. The x = 0 condition is already satisfied. The x = L node condition requires that the length L is related to λ by L = n 2λ;     n = 1, 2, 3, ...        (14.40) Thus, the possible wavelengths of stationary waves are constrained by the relation λ  = 2L n;    n =  1, 2, 3, …   (14

...        (14.40) Thus, the possible wavelengths of stationary waves are constrained by the relation λ  = 2L n;    n =  1, 2, 3, …   (14.41) with corresponding frequencies v =   2Lnv, for  n = 1, 2, 3,   (14.42) We have thus obtained the natural frequencies - the normal modes of oscillation of the system. The lowest possible natural frequency of a system is called its fundamental mode  or the first harmonic . For the stretched string fixed at either end it is given by v  = v L2, corresponding to n = 1 of Eq. (14.42). Here v is thespeed of wave determined by the properties of the medium. The n = 2 frequency is called the second harmonic; n = 3 is the third harmonic and so on. W e can label the various har monics by the symbol νn ( n = 1, 2, ...). Fig. 14.13 shows the first six harmonics of a stretched string fixed at either end. A string need not vibrate in one of these modes only

...). Fig. 14.13 shows the first six harmonics of a stretched string fixed at either end. A string need not vibrate in one of these modes only. Generally, the vibration of a string will be a superposition of different modes; some modes may be more strongly excited and some less. Musical instruments like sitar or violin are based on this principle. Where the string is plucked or bowed, determines which modes are more prominent than others. Let us next consider normal modes of oscillation of an air column with one end closed Fig. 14.13   The first six harmonics of vibrations of a stretched string fixed at both ends. 2024-25  PHYSICS 292 and the other open. A glass tube partially filled with water illustrates this system. The end in contact with water is a node, while the open end is an antinode. At the node the pressure changes are the largest, while the displacement is minimum (zero). At the open end - the antinode, it is just the other way - least pressure change and maximum amplitude of displacement

. At the open end - the antinode, it is just the other way - least pressure change and maximum amplitude of displacement. Taking the end in contact with water to be x  = 0, the node condition (Eq. 14.38) is already satisfied. If the other end x = L is an antinode, Eq. (14.39) gives L =   n+  1 2 2λ, for n = 0, 1, 2, 3, … The possible wavelengths are then restricted by the relation : λ  =  ( )2 1 2L n  +/,  for n = 0, 1, 2, 3,... (14.43) The normal modes – the natural frequencies – of the system are ν  =  n+  1 22v L; n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ... (14.44) The fundamental frequency corresponds to n = 0, and is given by v L4 . The higher frequencies are odd harmonics , i.e., odd multiples  of the fundamental frequency : 3v L4, 5v L4, etc. Fig. 14.14 shows the first six odd harmonics of air column with one end closed and the other open. For a pipe open at both ends, each end is an antinode. It is then easily seen that an open air column at both ends generates all harmonics (See Fig. 14.15)

. For a pipe open at both ends, each end is an antinode. It is then easily seen that an open air column at both ends generates all harmonics (See Fig. 14.15). The systems above, strings and air columns, can also undergo forced oscillations (Chapter 13). If the external frequency is close to one of the natural frequencies, the system shows resonance . Normal modes of a circular membrane rigidly clamped to the circumference as in a tabla are determined by the boundary condition that no point on the circumference of the membrane vibrates. Estimation of the frequencies of normalmodes of this system is more complex. This problem involves wave propagation in two dimensions. However , the underlying physics is the same. u uu uuExample 14.5   A pipe, 30.0 cm long, is open at both ends. Which harmonic mode of the pipe resonates a 1.1 kHz source?  Will resonance with the same source be observed if one end of the pipe is closed ? Take the speed of sound in air as 330 m s–1

. Which harmonic mode of the pipe resonates a 1.1 kHz source?  Will resonance with the same source be observed if one end of the pipe is closed ? Take the speed of sound in air as 330 m s–1. Answer   The first harmonic frequency is given by                 ν1 = Lv v 2   1=λ     (open pipe) where L is the length of the pipe. The frequency of its nth harmonic is: νn = Lnv 2, for n = 1, 2, 3, ... (open pipe) First few modes of an open pipe are shown in Fig. 14.15. For L = 30.0 cm, v = 330 m s–1, νn = 1 330 (m s ) 0.6 (m)−n = 550 n s–1 Clearly, a source of frequency 1.1 kHz will resonate at v2, i.e. the second harmonic . Fundamental or third fifth first harmonic harmonic harmonic 2024-25  WAVES 293 while tuning their instruments with each other . They go on tuning until their sensitive ears do not detect any beats. To see this mathematically, let us consider two harmonic sound waves of nearly equal angular frequency ω1 and ω2 and fix the location to be x = 0 for convenience. Eq. (14

. To see this mathematically, let us consider two harmonic sound waves of nearly equal angular frequency ω1 and ω2 and fix the location to be x = 0 for convenience. Eq. (14.2) with a suitable choice of phase ( φ = π/2 for each) and, assuming equal amplitudes, gives  s1 = a  cos ω1t   and  s2 = a  cos ω2t         (14.45) Here we have replaced the symbol y by s, since we are referring to longitudinal not transverse displacement. Let ω1 be the (slightly) greater of the two frequencies. The resultant displacement is, by the principle of superposition, s =  s1 + s2 = a (cos ω1 t + cos ω2 t) Using the familiar trignometric identity for cos A + cosB, we get ()()1 2 1 2 2 cos  cos2 2t taω ω ω ω  - += (14.46) which may be written as : s = [2 a  cos ωb t] cos ωat (14.47) If |ω1 – ω2| << ω1, ω2, ωa >> ωb, th where ωb = ( )1 2 2ω ω − and  ωa = ( ) 1 2 2ω ω + Now if we assume | ω1 – ω2| << ω1, which means ωa >> ωb, we can interpret Eq. (14.47) as follows

.47) If |ω1 – ω2| << ω1, ω2, ωa >> ωb, th where ωb = ( )1 2 2ω ω − and  ωa = ( ) 1 2 2ω ω + Now if we assume | ω1 – ω2| << ω1, which means ωa >> ωb, we can interpret Eq. (14.47) as follows. The resultant wave is oscillating with the average angular frequency ωa; however its amplitude is not constant in time, unlike a pure harmonic wave. The amplitude is the largest when the term cos ωb t takes its limit +1 or –1. In other words, the intensity of the resultant wave waxes and wanes with a frequency which is 2 ωb = ω1 –Fig. 14.14 Normal modes of an air column open at one end and closed at the other end. Only the odd harmonics are seen to be possible.seventh ninth eleventh harmonic harmonic harmonic Now if one end of the pipe is closed (Fig. 14.15) , it follows from Eq. (14.15) that the fundamental frequency is ν1 =  Lv v 4   1=λ (pipe closed at one end) and only the odd numbered harmonics are present : ν3 = 3 4v L,  ν5 = 5 4v L, and so on

.15) , it follows from Eq. (14.15) that the fundamental frequency is ν1 =  Lv v 4   1=λ (pipe closed at one end) and only the odd numbered harmonics are present : ν3 = 3 4v L,  ν5 = 5 4v L, and so on. For L = 30 cm and v = 330 m s–1, the fundamental frequency of the pipe closed at one end is 275 Hz and the source frequency corresponds to its fourth harmonic. Since this harmonic is not a possible mode, no resonance will be observed with the source, the moment one end is closed. ⊳ 14.7   BEATS ‘Beats’ is an interesting phenomenon arising from interference of waves. When two harmonic sound waves of close (but not equal) frequencies are heard at the same time, we hear a sound of similar frequency (the average of two close frequencies), but we hear something else also. We hear audibly distinct waxing and waning of the intensity of the sound, with a frequency equal to the difference in the two close frequencies. Artists use this phenomenon oftenFig. 14

. We hear audibly distinct waxing and waning of the intensity of the sound, with a frequency equal to the difference in the two close frequencies. Artists use this phenomenon oftenFig. 14.15 Standing waves in an open pipe, first four harmonics are depicted. 2024-25  PHYSICS 294 ω2. Since  ω = 2πν, the beat frequency νbeat, is given by νbeat = ν1 – ν2(14.48) Fig. 14.16 illustrates the phenomenon of beats for two harmonic waves of frequencies 11 Hz and 9 Hz. The amplitude of the resultant wave shows beats at a frequency of 2 Hz. u uu uu Example 14.6  Two sitar strings A and B playing the note ‘ Dha’ are slightly out of tune and produce beats of frequency 5 Hz. The tension of the string B is slightly increased and the beat frequency is found to decrease to 3 Hz. What is the original frequency of B if the frequency of A is 427 Hz ? Answer  Increase in the tension of a string increases its frequency

. What is the original frequency of B if the frequency of A is 427 Hz ? Answer  Increase in the tension of a string increases its frequency. If the original frequency of B ( νB) were greater than that of A ( νA ), further increase in νB should have resulted in an increase in the beat frequency. But the beat frequency is found to decrease. This shows that νB < νA. Since νA – νB = 5 Hz, and νA = 427 Hz, we get νB = 422 Hz. ⊳Musical Pillars Temples often have some pillars portraying human figures playing musical instru- ments, but seldom do these pillars themselves produce  music. At the Nellaiappar temple in Tamil Nadu, gentle taps on a cluster of pillars carved out of a single piece of rock produce the basic notes of Indian classical music, viz. Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, Sa. Vibrations of these pillars depend on elasticity of the stone used, its density and shape. Musical pillars are categorised into three types: The first is called the Shruti Pillar , as it can produce the basic notes —  the “swaras”

. Musical pillars are categorised into three types: The first is called the Shruti Pillar , as it can produce the basic notes —  the “swaras”. The second type is the Gana Thoongal , which generates the basic tunes that make up the “ragas”. The third variety is the Laya Thoongal  pillars that produce “taal” (beats) when tapped. The pillars at the Nellaiappar temple are a combination of the Shruti and Laya types. Archaeologists date the Nelliappar temple to the 7th century and claim it was built by successive rulers of the Pandyan dynasty. The musical pillars of Nelliappar and several other temples in southern India like those at Hampi (picture), Kanyakumari, and Thiruvananthapuram are unique to the country and have no parallel in any other part of the world. Fig. 14.16 Superposition of two harmonic waves, one of frequency 11 Hz (a), and the other of frequency 9Hz (b), giving rise to beats of frequency 2 Hz, as shown in (c). 2024-25  WAVES 295 SUMMARY 1

. Fig. 14.16 Superposition of two harmonic waves, one of frequency 11 Hz (a), and the other of frequency 9Hz (b), giving rise to beats of frequency 2 Hz, as shown in (c). 2024-25  WAVES 295 SUMMARY 1. Mechanical waves  can exist in material media and are governed by Newton’s Laws. 2. Transverse waves  are waves in which the particles of the medium oscillate perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. 3. Longitudinal waves  are waves in which the particles of the medium oscillate along the direction of wave propagation. 4. Progressive wave  is a wave that moves fr om one point of medium to another . 5. The displacement  in a sinusoidal wave propagating in the positive x direction is given by y (x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + φ) wher e a is the amplitude  of the wave,  k is the angular wave number , ω is the angular frequency , (kx – ωt + φ) is the phase , and φ is the phase constant or phase angle . 6

. 6. Wavelength λ of a pr ogressive wave is the distance between two consecutive points of the same phase at a given time. In a stationary wave, it is twice the  distance between two  consecutive nodes or antinodes. 7. Period T of oscillation of a wave is defined as the time any element of the medium takes to move through one complete oscillation. It is related to the angular frequenc yω through the relation T=2π ω 8. Frequency v of a wave is defined as 1/ T and is related to  angular frequency by 2ων=π 9. Speed  of a progressive wave is given by   k Tvω λλν = = = 10.  The speed of a transverse wave  on a stretched string is set by the properties of the string. The speed on a string with tension T and linear mass density µ is v=T µ 11. Sound waves  are longitudinal mechanical waves that can travel through solids, liquids, or gases

. The speed on a string with tension T and linear mass density µ is v=T µ 11. Sound waves  are longitudinal mechanical waves that can travel through solids, liquids, or gases. The speed v of sound wave in a fluid having bulk modulus B  and density ρ is vB= ρ The speed of longitudinal waves in a metallic bar is vY= ρ For  gases,  since B = γP, the speed of sound is vP=γ ρ 2024-25  PHYSICS 296 12. When two or more waves traverse simultaneously in the same medium, the displacement of any element of the medium is the algebraic sum of the displacements due to each wave. This is known as the principle of superposition  of waves 1(   )n i iy f x vt == −∑ 13. Two sinusoidal waves on the same string exhibit interference , adding or cancelling according to the principle of superposition

. Two sinusoidal waves on the same string exhibit interference , adding or cancelling according to the principle of superposition. If the two are travelling in the same direction and have the same amplitude a and frequency but differ in phase by a phase constant φ, the result is a single wave with the same frequency ω : y     (x, t)  = 21 21 2a kx cos sin φ ω φ  − +    t  If φ = 0 or an integral multiple of 2 π, the waves are exactly in phase and the interference is constructive; if φ = π, they are exactly out of phase and the interference is destructive. 14. A travelling wave, at a rigid boundary or a closed end, is reflected with a phase reversal but the reflection at an open boundary takes place without any phase change. For an incident wave                            yi (x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt ) the reflected wave at a rigid boundary is                          yr (x, t) = – a sin (kx + ωt ) For reflection at an open boundary                        yr (x,t ) = a sin (kx + ωt) 15

. The interference of two identical waves moving in opposite directions produces standing waves. For a string with fixed ends, the standing wave is given by y (x, t) = [2 a sin kx ] cos ωt Standing waves are characterised by fixed locations of zero displacement called nodes and fixed locations of maximum displacements called antinodes.  The separation between two consecutive nodes or antinodes is λ/2. A stretched string of length L fixed at both the ends vibrates with frequencies given by v  ,2=n v L     n = 1, 2, 3, ... The set of frequencies given by the above relation are called the normal modes of oscillation of the system. The oscillation mode with lowest frequency is called the fundamental mode  or the first harmonic.  The second harmonic  is the oscillation mode with n = 2 and so on. A pipe of length L with one end closed and other end open (such as air columns) vibrates with frequencies given by v ( )n ½  2Lv= + ,       n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ..

. A pipe of length L with one end closed and other end open (such as air columns) vibrates with frequencies given by v ( )n ½  2Lv= + ,       n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ... The set of frequencies represented by the above relation are the normal modes of oscillation of such a system. The lowest frequency given by v/4L is the fundamental mode or the first harmonic. 16. A string of length L fixed at both ends or an air column closed at one end and open at the other end or open at both the ends, vibrates with certain frequencies called their normal modes. Each of these frequencies is a resonant frequency  of the system. 17. Beats  arise when two waves having slightly different frequencies, ν1 and ν2 and comparable amplitudes, are superposed. The beat frequency is νbeat = ν1 ~ ν2 2024-25  WAVES 297 POINTS TO PONDER 1. A wave is not motion of matter as a whole in a medium.  A wind is different from the sound wave in air .  The for mer involves motion of air fr om one place to the other

. A wave is not motion of matter as a whole in a medium.  A wind is different from the sound wave in air .  The for mer involves motion of air fr om one place to the other .  The latter involves compr essions and rar efactions of layers of air . 2. In a wave, ener gy and not the matter  is transferr ed from one point to the other . 3. In a mechanical wave,  energy transfer takes place because of the coupling through elastic forces between neighbouring oscillating parts of the medium. 4. Transverse waves can propagate only in medium with shear modulus of elasticity, Longitudinal waves need bulk modulus of elasticity and are therefore, possible in all media, solids, liquids and gases. 5. In a harmonic progressive wave of a given frequency, all particles have the same amplitude but different phases at a given instant of time.  In a stationary wave, all particles between two nodes have the same phase at a given instant but have different amplitudes. 6

.  In a stationary wave, all particles between two nodes have the same phase at a given instant but have different amplitudes. 6. Relative to an observer at rest in a medium the speed of a mechanical wave in that medium ( v) depends only on elastic and other properties (such as mass density) of the medium. It does not depend on the velocity of the source. EXERCISES 14.1 A string of mass 2.50 kg is under a tension of 200 N. The length of the stretched string is 20.0 m. If the transverse jerk is struck at one end of the string, how long does the disturbance take to reach the other end? 14.2 A stone dropped from the top of a tower of height 300 m splashes into the water of a pond near the base of the tower . When is the splash hear d at the top given that the speed of sound in air is 340 m s–1 ? (g = 9.8 m s–2) 14.3 A steel wire has a length of 12.0 m and a mass of 2.10 kg

. When is the splash hear d at the top given that the speed of sound in air is 340 m s–1 ? (g = 9.8 m s–2) 14.3 A steel wire has a length of 12.0 m and a mass of 2.10 kg. What should be the tension in the wire so that speed of a transverse wave on the wire equals the speed of sound in dry air at 20 °C = 343 m s–1. 14.4 Use the formula v  P=γ ρto explain why the speed of sound in air (a) is independent of pressure, (b) increases with temperature, (c) increases with humidity. 2024-25  PHYSICS 298 14.5 You have lear nt that a travelling wave in one dimension is r epresented by a function y = f (x, t)  where x and t must appear in the combination x – v t  or x + v t , i.e. y = f (x ± v t) . Is the converse true? Examine if the following functions for y can possibly represent a travelling wave : (a) (x – vt )2 (b) log [( x + vt)/x0] (c) 1/(x + vt) 14.6 A bat emits ultrasonic sound of fr equency 1000 kHz in air

.6 A bat emits ultrasonic sound of fr equency 1000 kHz in air . If the sound meets a water surface, what is the wavelength of (a) the reflected sound, (b) the transmitted sound? Speed of sound in air is 340 m s –1 and in water 1486 m s–1. 14.7 A hospital uses an ultrasonic scanner to locate tumours in a tissue. What is the wavelength of sound in the tissue in which the speed of sound is 1.7 km s–1 ? The operating frequency of the scanner is 4.2 MHz. 14.8 A transverse harmonic wave on a string is described by                     y(x, t) = 3.0 sin (36  t + 0.018 x + π/4) where x and y are in cm and t in s. The positive direction of x is from left to right. (a) Is this a travelling wave or a stationary wave ? If it is travelling, what are the speed and direction of its propagation ? (b) What are its amplitude and frequency ? (c) What is the initial phase at the origin ? (d) What is the least distance between two successive crests in the wave ? 14.9 For the wave described in Exercise 14

.9 For the wave described in Exercise 14.8, plot the displacement ( y) versus ( t) graphs for x = 0, 2 and 4 cm. What are the shapes of these graphs? In which aspects does the oscillatory motion in travelling wave differ from one point to another: amplitude, frequency or phase ? 14.10    For the travelling harmonic wave y(x, t) = 2.0 cos 2 π (10t – 0.0080 x + 0.35) where x and y are in cm and t in s. Calculate the phase difference between oscillatory motion of two points separated by a distance of (a) 4 m, (b) 0.5 m, (c) λ/2, (d) 3λ/4 14.11 The transverse displacement of a string (clamped at its both ends) is given by y(x, t) = 0.06 sin 2 3πx   cos (120 πt) where x and y are in m and t in s. The length of the string is 1.5 m and its mass is 3.0 ×10–2 kg. Answer the following : (a) Does the function represent a travelling wave or a stationary wave? (b) Interpret the wave as a superposition of two waves travelling in opposite directions

.0 ×10–2 kg. Answer the following : (a) Does the function represent a travelling wave or a stationary wave? (b) Interpret the wave as a superposition of two waves travelling in opposite directions. What is the wavelength, frequency, and speed of each wave ? 2024-25  WAVES 299 (c) Determine the tension in the string. 14.12 (i) For the wave on a string described in Exercise 15.11, do all the points on the string oscillate with the same (a) frequency, (b) phase, (c) amplitude? Explain your answers. (ii) What is the amplitude of a point 0.375 m away from one end? 14.13 Given below are some functions of x and t to represent the displacement (transverse orlongitudinal) of an elastic wave. State which of these represent (i) a travelling wave, (ii) a stationary wave or (iii) none at all: (a) y = 2 cos (3 x) sin (10 t) (b) y x  vt = −2 (c) y = 3 sin (5 x – 0.5 t) + 4 cos (5 x – 0.5 t) (d) y = cos x sin t + cos 2 x sin 2 t 14

.5 t) + 4 cos (5 x – 0.5 t) (d) y = cos x sin t + cos 2 x sin 2 t 14.14 A wire stretched between two rigid supports vibrates in its fundamental mode with a frequency of 45 Hz. The mass of the wire is 3.5  × 10–2  kg and its linear mass density is 4.0× 10–2 kg m–1. What is (a) the speed of a transverse wave on the string, and (b) the tension in the string? 14.15 A metre-long tube open at one end, with a movable piston at the other end, shows resonance with a fixed frequency source  (a tuning fork of frequency 340 Hz) when the tube length is 25.5 cm or 79.3 cm. Estimate the speed of sound in air at the temperature of the experiment. The edge effects may be neglected. 14.16 A steel rod 100 cm long is clamped at its middle. The fundamental frequency of longitudinal vibrations of the rod are given to be 2.53 kHz. What is the speed of sound in steel? 14.17 A pipe 20 cm long is closed at one end

. The fundamental frequency of longitudinal vibrations of the rod are given to be 2.53 kHz. What is the speed of sound in steel? 14.17 A pipe 20 cm long is closed at one end. Which harmonic mode of the pipe is resonantly excited by a 430 Hz source ? Will the same source be in resonance with the pipe if both ends are open? (speed of sound in air is 340 m s–1). 14.18 Two sitar strings A and B playing the note ‘ Ga’ are slightly out of tune and produce beats of frequency 6 Hz. The tension in the string A is slightly reduced and the beat  frequency is found to reduce to 3 Hz. If the original frequency of A is 324 Hz, what is the frequency of B? 14

. The tension in the string A is slightly reduced and the beat  frequency is found to reduce to 3 Hz. If the original frequency of A is 324 Hz, what is the frequency of B? 14.19 Explain why (or how): (a) in a sound wave, a displacement node is a pressure antinode and vice versa, (b) bats can ascertain distances, directions, nature, and sizes of the obstacles without any “eyes”, (c) a violin note and sitar note may have the same frequency, yet we can distinguish between the two notes, (d) solids can support both longitudinal and transverse waves, but only longitudinal waves can propagate in gases, and (e) the shape of a pulse gets distorted during propagation in a dispersive medium. 2024-25  300 PHYSICS Chapter   8 8.1 1.8 8.2 (a) From the given graph for a stress of 150 × 106 N m–2 the strain is 0.002 (b) Approximate yield strength of the material is 3 × 108 N m–2 8

. 2024-25  300 PHYSICS Chapter   8 8.1 1.8 8.2 (a) From the given graph for a stress of 150 × 106 N m–2 the strain is 0.002 (b) Approximate yield strength of the material is 3 × 108 N m–2 8.3 (a) Material A (b) Strength of a material is determined by the amount of stress required to cause  fracture: material A is stronger than material B. 8.4 (a) False  (b) True 8.5 1.5 × 10–4 m (steel); 1.3 ×  10–4 m (brass) 8.6 Deflection = 4 ×  10–6 m 8.7 2.8 × 10–6 8.8 0.127 8.9 7.07 × 104 N 8.10 Dcopper/Diron = 1.25 8.11 1.539 × 10–4 m 8.12 2.026 × 109 Pa 8.13 1.034 × 103 kg/m3 8.14 0.0027 8.15 0.058 cm3 8.16 2.2 × 106 N/m2 ANSWERS 2024-25  ANSWERS 301 Chapter   9 9.3 (a) decreases (b) η of gases increases, η of liquid decreases with temperature (c) shear strain, rate of shear strain (d) conservation of mass, Ber noulli’s equation (e) gr eater. 9.5  6.2 × 106 Pa 9.6  10.5 m 19.7 Pressure at that depth in the sea is about 3  × 107 Pa. The structure is suitable since it can withstand far greater pressure or stress. 9.8 6

. 9.5  6.2 × 106 Pa 9.6  10.5 m 19.7 Pressure at that depth in the sea is about 3  × 107 Pa. The structure is suitable since it can withstand far greater pressure or stress. 9.8 6.92 × 105 Pa 9.9 0.800 9.10 Mercury will rise in the arm containing spirit; the difference in levels of mercury will be 0.221 cm. 9.11 No, Bernoulli’s principle applies to streamline flow only. 9.12 No, unless the atmospheric pressures at the two points where Bernoulli’s equation is applied are significantly different. 9.13 9.8 × 102 Pa (The Reynolds number is about 0.3 so the flow is laminar). 9.14 1.5 × 103 N 9.15 Fig (a) is incorrect [Reason: at a constriction (i.e. where the area of cross-section of the tube is smaller), flow speed is larger due to mass conservation. Consequently pressure there is smaller accor ding to Ber noulli’s equation. W e assume the fluid to be incompressible]. 9.16 0.64 m s–1 9.17 2.5 × 10–2 N m–1 9.18 4.5 × 10–2  N for (b) and (c), the same as in (a). 9.19 Excess pr essur e = 310 Pa, total pr essur e = 1

. W e assume the fluid to be incompressible]. 9.16 0.64 m s–1 9.17 2.5 × 10–2 N m–1 9.18 4.5 × 10–2  N for (b) and (c), the same as in (a). 9.19 Excess pr essur e = 310 Pa, total pr essur e = 1.0131 × 105 Pa. However , since data ar e correct to three significant figures, we should write total pressure inside the drop as 1.01 × 105 Pa. 9.20 Excess pressure inside the soap bubble = 20.0 Pa; excess pressure inside the air bubble in soap solution = 10.0 Pa. Outside pressure for air bubble = 1.01 × 105 + 0.4 × 103 × 9.8 × 1.2 = 1.06 × 105 Pa. The excess pressure is so small that up to three significant figures, total pressure inside the air bubble is 1.06 × 105 Pa. Chapter   10 10.1 Neon:  – 248.58 ° C  = – 415.44 °F; CO2:  – 56.60  °C  =  – 69.88 °F (use  tF  =  3259 c+t ) 2024-25  302 PHYSICS 10.2 TA  = ( 4/7)  TB 10.3 384.8 K 10

.06 × 105 Pa. Chapter   10 10.1 Neon:  – 248.58 ° C  = – 415.44 °F; CO2:  – 56.60  °C  =  – 69.88 °F (use  tF  =  3259 c+t ) 2024-25  302 PHYSICS 10.2 TA  = ( 4/7)  TB 10.3 384.8 K 10.4 (a) Triple-point has a unique  temperature; fusion point and boiling point temperatures depend on pressure; (b) The other fixed point is the absolute zero itself; (c) Triple-point is 0.01 °C, not 0 °C; (d)  491.69. 10.5 (a)  TA  =  392.69 K, TB =  391.98 K;  (b) The discrepancy arises because the gases are not perfectly ideal. To reduce the discrepancy, readings should be taken for lower and lower pressures and the plot between temperature measured versus absolute pressure of the gas at triple point should be extrapolated to obtain temperature in the limit pressur e tends to zer o, when the gases appr oach ideal gas behaviour . 10.6 Actual length of the r od at 45.0 °C = (63.0 + 0.0136) cm = 63.0136 cm.  (However , we should say that change in length up to three significant figures is 0.0136 cm, but the total length is 63

. 10.6 Actual length of the r od at 45.0 °C = (63.0 + 0.0136) cm = 63.0136 cm.  (However , we should say that change in length up to three significant figures is 0.0136 cm, but the total length is 63.0 cm, up to three significant places. Length of the same rod at 27.0 °C =  63.0 cm. 10.7 When the shaft is cooled to temperature – 690C the wheel can slip on the shaft. 10.8 The diameter increases by an amount = 1.44 × 10–2 cm. 10.9 3.8 × 102 N 10.10 Since the ends of the combined rod are not clamped, each rod expands freely. ∆lbrass =  0.21  cm, ∆lsteel  =  0.126 cm  =  0.13 cm Total change in length = 0.34 cm. No ‘thermal stress’ is developed at the junction since the rods freely expand. 10.11 0.0147  =  1.5 × 10– 2 10.12 103 °C 10.13 1.5 kg 10.14 0.43 J g –1 K–1 ; smaller 10.15 The gases are diatomic, and have other degrees of freedom (i.e. have other modes of motion) possible besides the translational degrees of freedom

.13 1.5 kg 10.14 0.43 J g –1 K–1 ; smaller 10.15 The gases are diatomic, and have other degrees of freedom (i.e. have other modes of motion) possible besides the translational degrees of freedom. To raise the temperature of the gas by a certain amount, heat is to be supplied to increase the average energy of all the modes. Consequently, molar specific heat of diatomic  gases is more than that of monatomic gases. It can be shown that if only rotational modes of motion are considered, the molar specific heat of diatomic gases is nearly (5/2) R which agrees with the observations for all the gases listed in the table, except chlorine. The higher value of molar specific heat of chlori ne indicates that besides rotational modes, vibrational modes are also present in chlorine at room temperature. 10.16 4.3 g/min 10.17 3.7 kg 10.18 238 °C 10.20 9 min 2024-25  ANSWERS 303 Chapter   11 11.1 16 g per min 11.2 934 J 11.4 2.64 11.5 16.9 J 11.6 (a) 0

. 10.16 4.3 g/min 10.17 3.7 kg 10.18 238 °C 10.20 9 min 2024-25  ANSWERS 303 Chapter   11 11.1 16 g per min 11.2 934 J 11.4 2.64 11.5 16.9 J 11.6 (a) 0.5 atm (b) zero (c) zero (assuming the gas to be ideal) (d) No, since the process (called free expansion) is rapid and cannot be controlled. The intermediate states are non-equilibrium states and do not satisfy the gas equation. In due course, the gas does return to an equilibrium state. 11.7 25 W 11.8 450 J Chapter   12 12.1 4 × 10–4 12.3 (a)  The dotted plot corresponds to ‘ideal’ gas behaviour;  (b) T1 > T2; (c) 0.26 J K–1; (d) No, 6.3 ×  10–5 kg  of H2 would yield the same value 12.4 0.14  kg 12.5 5.3 × 10–6   m3 12.6 6.10 × 1026 12.7 (a)  6.2 × 10–21 J (b)  1.24 × 10–19 J                 (c) 2.1 × 10–16 J 12.8 Yes, accor ding to A vogadr o’s law.  No, vrms is lar gest for the lightest of the thr ee gases; neon. 12.9 2.52 × 103 K 12.10 Use the formula for mean free path : = π21 2l nd where d is the diameter of a molecule

.  No, vrms is lar gest for the lightest of the thr ee gases; neon. 12.9 2.52 × 103 K 12.10 Use the formula for mean free path : = π21 2l nd where d is the diameter of a molecule.  For the given pressure and temperature N/V = 5.10 × 1025 m–3 and   = 1.0 × 10–7 m.  vrms = 5.1 × 102 m s–1. 2024-25  304 PHYSICS collisional fr equency = 9 –1 rms5.1 10 sv l= × . Time taken for the collision = d / vrms  = 4 × 10–13 s. Time taken between successive collisions = l / vrms = 2 × 10-10 s. Thus the time taken between successive collisions is 500 times the time taken for a collision. Thus a molecule in a gas moves essentially free for most of the time. Chapter   13 13.1 (b), (c) 13.2(b) and (c): SHM; (a) and (d) represent periodic but not SHM [A polyatomic molecule has a number of natural frequencies; so in general, its vibration is a superposition of SHM’s of a number of different frequencies. This superposition is periodic but not SHM]. 13

. This superposition is periodic but not SHM]. 13.3 (b) and (d) are periodic, each with a period of 2 s; (a) and (c) are not periodic. [Note in (c), repetition of merely one position is not enough for motion to be periodic; the entire motion during one period must be repeated successively]. 13.4 (a) Simple harmonic, T = (2 π/ω); (b) periodic, T =(2 π/ω) but not simple harmonic; (c) simple harmonic, T = (π/ω); (d) periodic,  T = (2 π/ω) but not simple harmonic; (e) non-periodic; (f) non-periodic (physically not acceptable as the function → ∞ as t → ∞. 13.5 (a) 0, +, + ; (b) 0, –, – ; (c) –, 0,0 ;  (d) –, –, – ;  (e) +, +, + ;   ( f) –, –, –. 13.6 (c) represents a simple harmonic motion. 13.7 A = 2 cm, φ = 7π/4; B = 2 cm, a = π/4. 13.8 219 N 13.9 Frequency 3.2 s–1; maximum acceleration of the mass 8.0 m s–2; maximum speed of the mass 0.4 m s–1. 13.10 (a) x = 2 sin 20 t (b) x = 2 cos 20 t (c) x = – 2 cos 20 t where x is in cm. These functions differ neither in amplitude nor frequency

.0 m s–2; maximum speed of the mass 0.4 m s–1. 13.10 (a) x = 2 sin 20 t (b) x = 2 cos 20 t (c) x = – 2 cos 20 t where x is in cm. These functions differ neither in amplitude nor frequency. They differ in initial phase. 13.11 (a) x = – 3 sin πt where x  is in cm. (b) x = – 2 cos π 2t where x is in cm. 13.13 (a) F/k for both (a) and (b). (b) T = 2πm kfor (a) and 2 π km 2 for (b) 2024-25  ANSWERS 305 13.14 100 m/min 13.15 8.4 s 13.16 π +2 4 2T = 2 g /l v R . Hint: Effective acceleration due to gravity will get reduced due to radial acceleration  v2/R acting in the horizontal plane. 13.17 In equilibrium, weight of the cork equals the up thrust. When the cork is depressed by an amount x, the net upward force is A xρl g. Thus the force constant k = Aρl g . Using m = Ahρ, and T = 2π km one gets the given expr ession. 13

. When the cork is depressed by an amount x, the net upward force is A xρl g. Thus the force constant k = Aρl g . Using m = Ahρ, and T = 2π km one gets the given expr ession. 13.18 When both the ends are open to the atmosphere, and the difference in levels of the liquid in the two arms is h, the net force  on the liquid column is Ahρg where A is the area of cross-section of the tube and ρ is the density of the liquid. Since restoring force is proportional to h, motion is simple harmonic. Chapter  14 14.1 0.5 s 14.2 8.7 s 14.3 2.06 × 104 N 14.4 Assume ideal gas law: P = ρRT M, where ρ is the density, M is the molecular mass, and T is the temperature of the gas. This gives v =RT Mγ. This shows that v is: (a)Independent of pressure. (b)Increases as T. (c)The molecular mass of water (18) is less than that of N2 (28) and O2 (32). Therefore as humidity increases, the effective molecular mass of air decreases and hence v increases. 14.5 The converse is not true

. Therefore as humidity increases, the effective molecular mass of air decreases and hence v increases. 14.5 The converse is not true. An obvious requirement for an acceptable function for a travelling wave is that it should be finite everywhere and at all times. Only function (c) satisfies this condition, the remaining functions cannot possibly represent a travelling wave. 14.6 (a)    3.4 × 10–4 m (b)    1.49 × ×10–3 m 2024-25  306 PHYSICS 14.7 4.1 × 10–4 m 14.8 (a)A travelling wave. It travels from right to left with a speed of 20 ms–1. (b)3.0 cm, 5.7 Hz (c) π/4 (d)3.5 m 14.9 All the graphs are sinusoidal. They have same amplitude and frequency, but different initial phases. 14.10 (a)6.4 π rad (b)   0.8 π rad (c) π rad (d)(π/2) rad 14.11 (a)Stationary wave (b)l = 3 m, n = 60 Hz, and v = 180 m s–1 for each wave (c )648 N 14.12 (a)All the points except the nodes on the string have the same frequency and phase, but not the same amplitude. (b)0.042 m 14.13 (a)Stationary wave

.12 (a)All the points except the nodes on the string have the same frequency and phase, but not the same amplitude. (b)0.042 m 14.13 (a)Stationary wave. (b)Unacceptable function for any wave. (c)Travelling harmonic wave. (d)Superposition of two stationary waves. 14.14 (a)79 m s–1 (b)248 N 14.15 347 m s–1 Hint : vn =  lv ) n ( 41 2− ; n = 1,2,3,….for a pipe with one end closed 14.16 5.06 km s–1 14.17 First harmonic (fundamental); No. 14.18 318 Hz 2024-25  ANSWERS 307 BIBLIOGRAPHY TEXTBOOKS For additional reading on the topics covered in this book, you may like to consult one or more of the following books. Some of these books however are more advanced and contain many more topics than this book. 1.Ordinary Level Physics , A.F. Abbott, Ar nold-Heinemann (1984). 2.Advanced Level Physics , M. Nelkon and P . Parker , 6th Edition Ar nold- Heinemann (1987). 3.Advanced Physics , Tom Duncan, John Murray (2000). 4.Fundamentals of Physics , David Halliday, Robert Resnick and Jearl Walker, 7th Edition John W ily (2004)

. 3.Advanced Physics , Tom Duncan, John Murray (2000). 4.Fundamentals of Physics , David Halliday, Robert Resnick and Jearl Walker, 7th Edition John W ily (2004). 5.University Physics , H.D. Y oung, M.W . Zemansky and F .W. Sears, Nar osa Pub. House (1982). 6.Problems in Elementary Physics , B. Bukhovtsa, V. Krivchenkov, G. Myakishev and V. Shalnov, MIR Publishers, (1971). 7.Lectures on Physics  (3 volumes), R.P . Feynman, Addision – W esley (1965). 8.Berkeley Physics Course  (5 volumes) McGraw Hill (1965). a.Vol. 1 – Mechanics: (Kittel, Knight and Ruder man) b.Vol. 2 – Electricity and Magnetism (E.M. Pur cell) c.Vol. 3 – W aves and Oscillations (Frank S. Craw-for d) d.Vol. 4 – Quantum Physics (W ichmann) e.Vol. 5 – Statistical Physics (F . Reif) 9.Fundamental University Physics , M. Alonso and E. J. Finn, Addison – Wesley (1967). 10. College Physics , R.L. W eber, K.V. Manning, M.W . White and G.A. W eygand, Tata McGraw Hill (1977). 11. Physics : Foundations and Frontiers, G. Gamow and J.M

. J. Finn, Addison – Wesley (1967). 10. College Physics , R.L. W eber, K.V. Manning, M.W . White and G.A. W eygand, Tata McGraw Hill (1977). 11. Physics : Foundations and Frontiers, G. Gamow and J.M. Cleveland, Tata McGraw Hill (1978). 12. Physics for the Inquiring Mind, E.M. Rogers, Princeton University Press (1960) 13. PSSC Physics Course , DC Heath and Co. (1965) Indian Edition, NCER T (1967) 14. Physics Advanced Level , Jim Breithampt, Stanley Thornes Publishers (2000). 15. Physics, Patrick  Fullick, Heinemann (2000). 2024-25  16. Conceptual Physics,  Paul G. Hewitt, Addision-W esley (1998). 17. College Physics,  Raymond A. Serway and Jerry S. Faughn, Harcourt Brace and Co. (1999). 18. University Physics,  Harris Benson, John Wiley (1996). 19. University Physics,  William P . Crummet and Arthur B. W ester n, Wm.C. Brown (1994). 20. General Physics, Morton M. Sternheim and Joseph W. Kane, John Wiley (1988). 21. Physics, Hans C. Ohanian, W.W. Norton (1989). 22

. Crummet and Arthur B. W ester n, Wm.C. Brown (1994). 20. General Physics, Morton M. Sternheim and Joseph W. Kane, John Wiley (1988). 21. Physics, Hans C. Ohanian, W.W. Norton (1989). 22. Advanced Physics, Keith Gibbs, Cambridge University Press(1996). 23. Understanding Basic Mechanics, F. Reif, John W iley (1995). 24. College Physics,  Jerry D. Wilson and Anthony J. Buffa, Prentice-Hall (1997). 25. Senior Physics, Part – I, I.K. Kikoin and A.K. Kikoin, Mir Publishers (1987). 26. Senior Physics, Part – II, B. Bekhovtsev, Mir Publishers (1988). 27. Understanding Physics, K. Cummings, Patrick J. Cooney, Priscilla W. Laws and Edwar d F. Redish, John W iley (2005) 28. Essentials of Physics, John D. Cutnell and Kenneth W. Johnson, John Wiley (2005) GENERAL BOOKS For instructive and entertaining general reading on science, you may like to read some of the following books. Remember however , that many of these books ar e written at a level far beyond the level of the present book. 1.Mr. Tompkins  in paperback, G

. Remember however , that many of these books ar e written at a level far beyond the level of the present book. 1.Mr. Tompkins  in paperback, G. Gamow, Cambridge University Pr ess (1967). 2.The Universe and Dr. Einstein , C. Bar nett, T ime Inc. New Y ork (1962). 3.Thirty years that Shook Physics , G. Gamow, Double Day, New Y ork (1966). 4.Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman , R.P. Feynman, Bantam books (1986). 5.One, Two, Three…  Infinity , G. Gamow, Viking Inc. (1961). 6.The Meaning of Relativity , A. Einstein, (Indian Edition) Oxford and IBH Pub. Co (1965). 7.Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature , Niels Bohr , Cambridge (1934). 8.The Physical Principles of Quantum Theory , W. Heisenberg, University of Chicago Press (1930). 9.The Physics- Astronomy Frontier , F. Hoyle and J.V . Narlikar , W.H. Freeman (1980). 10. The Flying Circus of Physics with Answer , J. W alker , John W iley and Sons (1977). 11. Physics for Everyone (series), L.D. Landau and A.I. Kitaigorodski, MIR Publisher (1978)

.H. Freeman (1980). 10. The Flying Circus of Physics with Answer , J. W alker , John W iley and Sons (1977). 11. Physics for Everyone (series), L.D. Landau and A.I. Kitaigorodski, MIR Publisher (1978). Book 1: Physical Bodies Book 2: Molecules Book 3: Electrons Book 4: Photons and Nuclei. 12. Physics can be Fun , Y. Perelman, MIR Publishers (1986). 13. Power of Ten , Philip Morrison and Eames, W.H. Freeman (1985). 14. Physics in your Kitchen Lab ., I.K. Kikoin, MIR Publishers (1985). 15. How Things Work : The Physics of Everyday Life , Louis A. Bloomfield, John Wiley (2005) 16. Physics Matters : An Introduction to Conceptual Physics, James Trefil and Robert M. Hazen, John Wiley (2004)

.PHYSICS 308 2024-25  A Absolute scale temperature 280 Absolute zero 280 Acceleration (linear) 45 Acceleration due to gravity 49,189 Accuracy 22 Action-reaction 97 Addition of vectors 67 Adiabatic process 311, 312 Aerofoil 262 Air resistance 79 Amplitude 344, 372 Angle of contact 267, 268 Angstrom 21 Angular Acceleration 154 Angular displacement 342 Angular frequency 344, 373 Angular momentum 155 Angular velocity 152 Angular wave number 372 Antinodes 381,382 Archimedes Principle 255 Area expansion 281 Atmospheric pressure 253 Average acceleration 45, 74 Average speed 42 Average velocity 42 Avogardo's law 325 B Banked road 104 Barometer 254 Beat frequency 383 Beats 382, 383 Bending of beam 244 Bernoulli's Principle 258 Blood pressure 276 Boiling point 287 Boyle's law 326 Buckling 244INDEX Bulk modulus 242 Buoyant force 255 C Calorimeter 285 Capillary rise 268 Capillary waves 370 Carnot engine 316 Central forces 186 Centre of Gravity 161 Centre of mass 144 Centripetal acceleration 81 Centripetal force 104 Change of state 287 Charle's law 326 Chemical Energy 126 Circular motion 104 Clausius statement 315 Coefficient of area expansion 283 Coefficient of linear expansion 281 Coefficient of performance 314 Coefficient of static friction 101 Coefficient of viscosity 262 Coefficient of volume expansion 281 Cold reservoir 313 Collision 129 Collision in two dimensions 131 Compressibility 242, 243 Compressions 368, 369, 374 Compressive stress 236, 243 Conduction 290 Conservation laws 12 Conservation of angular momentum 157, 173 Conservation of Mechanical Energy 121 Conservation of momentum 98 Conservative force 121 Constant acceleration 46,75 Contact force 100 Convection 293 Couple 159 Crest 371 Cyclic process 312 2024-25  D Dalton's l aw of partial pressure 325 Damped oscillations 355 Damped simple Harmonic motion 355 Damping constant 355 Damping force 355 Derived units 16 Detergent action 269 Diastolic pressure 277 Differential calculus 61 Dimensional analysis 32 Dimensions 31 Displacement vector 66 Displacement 40 Doppler effect 385, 386 Doppler shift 387 Driving frequency 358 Dynamics of  rotational motion 169 E Efficiency of heat engine 313 Elastic Collision 129 Elastic deformation 236, 238 Elastic limit 238 Elastic moduli 239 Elasticity 235 Elastomers 239 Electromagnetic force 8 Energy 117 Equality of vectors 66 Equation of continuity 257 Equilibrium of a particle 99 Equilibrium of Rigid body 158 Equilibrium position 341, 342, 353 Errors in measurement 22 Escape spee d 193 F First law of Thermodynamics 307 Fluid pressure 251 Force 94 Forced frequency 357 Forced oscillations 357, 358 Fracture point 238 Free Fall 49 Free-body diagram 100 Frequency of periodic motion 342, 372 Friction 101 Fundamental Forces 6 Fundamental mode 381 Fusion 287 G Gauge  pressure 253 Geocentric model 183Geostationary satellite 196 Gravitational constant 189 Gravitational Force 8, 192 Gravitational potential energy 191 Gravity  waves 370 H Harmonic frequency 380, 381 Harmonics 380, 381 Heat capacity 284 Heat engines 313 Heat pumps 313 Heat 279 Heliocentric model 183 Hertz 343 Hooke's law 238 Horizontal range 78 Hot reservoir 313 Hydraulic brakes 255, 256 Hydraulic lift 255, 256 Hydraulic machines 255 Hydraulic pressure 238 Hydraulic stress 238, 243 Hydrostatic paradox 253 I Ideal gas equation 280 Ideal gas 280, 325 Impulse 96 Inelastic collision 129 Initial phase angle 372 Instantaneous acceleration 74 Instantaneous speed 45 Instantaneous velocity 43 Interference 377 Internal energy 306, 330 Irreversible engine 315, 317 Irreversible processes 315 Isobaric process 311, 312 Isochoric process 311, 312 Isotherm 310 Isothermal proce ss 311 K Kelvin-Planck statement 315 Kepler's laws of planetary motion 184 Kinematics of Rotational Motion 167 Kinematics 39 Kinetic energy of rolling motion 174 Kinetic Energy 117 Kinetic interpretation of temperature 329 Kinetic theory of gases 328 L Laminar flow 258, 264 Laplace correction 376310 PHYSICS 2024-25  Latent heat of fusion 290 Latent heat of vaporisation 290 Latent heat 289 Law of cosine 72 Law of equipartition of energy 332 Law of Inertia 90 Law of sine 72 Linear expansion 281 Linear harmonic oscillator 349, 351 Linear momentum 155 Longitudinal strain 236 Longitudinal strain 236, 239 Longitudinal stress 236 Longitudinal W ave 369, 376 M Magnus effect 261 Manometer 254 Mass Energy Equivalence 126 Maximum height of projectile 78 Maxwell Distribution 331 Mean free path 324, 335 Measurement of length 18 Measurement of mass 21 Measurement of temperature 279 Measurement of time 22 Melting point 286 Modes 380 Modulus of elasticity 238 Modulus of rigidity 242 Molar specific heat capacity 284, 308 at constant pressure Molar specific heat capacity 284, 308 at constant volume Molar specific heat capacity 284 Molecular nature of matter 323 Moment of Inertia 163 Momentum 93 Motion in a plane 72 Multiplication of vectors 67 Musical instruments 384 N Natural frequency 358 Newton's first law of motion 91 Newton's Law of cooling 295 Newton's law of gravitation 185 Newton's second law of motion 93 Newton's third law of motion 96 Newtons' formula for speed of sound 377 Nodes 381 Normal Modes 381, 382, 384 Note 384, 385 Nuclear Energy 126 Null vector 68O Odd harmonics 382 Orbital velocity/speed 194 Order of magnitude 28 Oscillations 342 Oscillatory motion 342 P Parallax method 18 Parallelogram law of addition of vectors 66 Pascal's law 252 Path length 40 Path of projectile 78 Periodic force 358 Periodic motion 342 Periodic time 342 Permanent set 238 Phase angle 344 Phase constant 344 Pipe open at both ends 382 Pipe open at one end 381 Pitch 384 Plastic deformation 238 Plasticity 235 Polar satellite 196 Position vector and displacement 73 Potential energy of a spring 123 Potential energy 120 Power 128 Precession 143 Pressure gauge 253 Pressure of an ideal gas 328 Pressure 250 Principle of Conservation of Energy 128 Principle of moments 160 Progressive wave 373 Projectile motion 77 Projectile 77 Propagation constant 371 Pulse 369 Q Quasi-static process 310, 311 R Radiation 294 Radius of Gyration 164 Raman effect 11 Rarefactions 369 Ratio of specific heat capacities 334 Reaction time 51 Real gases 326 Rectilinear motion 39 Reductionism 2 Reflected wave 379 Reflection of waves 378INDEX 311 2024-25  Refracted wave 379 Refrigerator 313 Regelation 287 Relative velocity in two dimensions 76 Relative velocity 51 Resolution of vectors 69 Resonance 358 Restoring force 236, 350, 369 Reversible engine 316, 317 Reversible processes 315 Reynolds number 264 Rigid body 141 Rolling motion 173 Root mean square speed 329 Rotation 142 S S

.H.M

. (Simple Harmonic Motion) 343 Scalar -product 114 Scalars 65 Scientific Method 1 Second law of Thermodynamics 314 Shear modulus 242 Shearing strain 237 Shearing stress 237, 243 SI units 16 Significant figures 27 Simple pendulum 343, 353 Soap bubbles 268 Sonography 387 Sound 375 Specific hea t capacity  of Solids 308, 335 Specific heat capacity of Gases 333, 334 Specific heat capacity of W ater 335 Specific heat capacity 285, 308 Speed of efflux 259 Speed of Sound 375, 376 Speed of Transverse wave 375, 376 on a stretched string Sphygmomanometer 277 Spring constant 352, 355 Standing waves 380 Stationary waves 382 Steady flow 257 Stethoscope 281 Stokes' law 263 Stopping distance 50 Strain 236 Streamline flow 257, 258 Streamline 257, 258 Stress 236 Stress-strain curve 238 Stretched string 374 Sublimation 294 Subtraction of vectors 67 Superposition principle 378 Surface energy 265Surface tension 265 Symmetry 146 System of units 16 Systolic pressure 277 T Temperature 279 Tensile strength 238 Tensile stress 236 Terminal velocity 264 Theorem of parallel axes 167 Theorem of perpendicular axes 165 Thermal conductivity 291 Thermal equilibrium 304 Thermal expansion 281 Thermal stress 284 Thermodynamic processes 310 Thermodynamic state variables 309 Thermodynamics 3, 303 Time of flight 78 Torque 154 Torricelli's Law 259, 260 Trade wind 294 Transmitted wave 379 Travelling wave 380 Triangle law of addition of vectors 66 Triple point 288 Trough 371 Tune 384 Turbul ent flow 258, 259 U Ultimate strength 238 Ultrasonic waves 387 Unification of Forces 10 Unified Atomic Mass Unit 21 Uniform circular motion 79 Uniform Motion 41 Uniformly accelerated motion 47 Unit vectors 70 V Vane 356 Vaporisation 288 Vector -product 151 Vectors 66 Velocity amplitude 349 Venturi meter 260 Vibration 341 Viscosity 262 Volume expansion 281 Volume Strain 238 W Wave equation 374 Wavelength 372 Wave speed 374312 PHYSICS 2024-25  Waves 368 Waxing and waning of sound 385 Weak nuclear for ce 9 Weightlessness 197 Work done by variable for ce 118 Work 116 Work-Ener gy Theor em 116 Working substance 313Y Yield P oint 238 Yield strength 238 Young's  modulus 239 Z Zeroth law of Thermodynamics 305313 INDEX 2024-25  314 PHYSICS NOTES 2024-25  Part II TexTbook for Class xI Prelims

.indd   1 1/2/2023   10:32:34 2024-25  First Edition      April 2006  Chaitra 1928 Reprinted      October 2006, February 2008, January 2009, January 2010,January 2012, January 2013,January 2014, January 2015,May 2016, February 2017,December 2017, January 2019,October 2019, January 2021,July 2021 and March 2022 Revised Edition January 2023  Pausha 1944 Reprinted      March 2024 Chaitra 1946 PD 350T SU © National Council of Educational   Research and Training, 2006, 2023 ` 145.00ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval  system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.  This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published

.  The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable. OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION   DIVISION , NCERT NCERT Campus Sri Aurobindo MargNew  Delhi 110 016  Phone :  011-26562708 108, 100 Feet Road Hosdakere Halli ExtensionBanashankari III StageBengaluru 560 085  Phone : 080-26725740 Navjivan Trust BuildingP.O.Navjivan Ahmedabad 380 014  Phone :  079-27541446 CWC CampusOpp. Dhankal Bus StopPanihatiKolkata 700 114  Phone :  033-25530454 CWC ComplexMaligaon  Guwahati 781 021  Phone :  0361-2674869   Publication Team Head, Publication  : Anup Kumar Rajput DivisionChief Editor  : Shveta Uppal Chief Production  : Arun Chitkara OfficerChief Business  : Amitabh Kumar Manager (In charge)Assistant Editor  : R.N

.N. Bhardwaj Assistant Production  : Om Prakash  Officer Cover and Illustrations Shweta Rao11087  – P hysics  (Part ii) Textbook for Class XIISBN  81-7450-508-3 (Part-I) ISBN  81-7450-566-0 (Part-II) Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT  watermark Published at the Publication Division by the Secretary, National Council of Educational Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo   Marg, New Delhi 110016 and printed at Fauji Printing Press, Khasra. No. 24/20 Nangli Shakrawati Industrial Area, Najafgarh,   New Delhi- 110 043 Prelims.indd   2 28-Mar-24   12:30:09 AM 2024-25  Foreword the National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life  at  school must be linked to their life outside the school. this principle marks a   dep arture from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our  system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. the syllabi  and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this  basic idea

. the syllabi  and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this  basic idea. they also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of  sharp boundaries between dif ferent subject areas. We hope these measures will  take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986). the success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and  teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,   time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.  treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of  examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored

.  treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of  examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat   children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge. these aims imply considerable change is school routines and mode of functioning.  Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted   to teaching. the methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how  effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address   the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching

.  the textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher  priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience. the N ational Council of Educational resea rch and train ing (NCE rt) ap preciates  the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science   and mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief  advisor for this book,  Professor a.W. Joshi for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers  contributed  to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals  for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel

. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human  resource Development under the Chairpersonship  of Professor  Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution.  as an organisation committed to systemic refor m and continuous improvement  in the quality of its products, NCE rt welcomes comments and suggestions  which  will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.  Director New Delhi  National Council of Educational  20 December 2005  research and training Prelims.indd   3 1/2/2023   10:32:34 2024-25  Prelims.indd   4 1/2/2023   10:32:34 2024-25  rationalisation  oF content  in the textbooks In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on  students

.indd   4 1/2/2023   10:32:34 2024-25  rationalisation  oF content  in the textbooks In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on  students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise

. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise. Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:  Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same  class  Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject   Difficulty  level  Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-learning  Content, which is irrelevant in the present context This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes   given above. Prelims.indd   5 1/2/2023   10:32:34 2024-25  Prelims.indd   6 1/2/2023   10:32:34 2024-25  PreFace More than a decade ago, based on National Policy of Education (NPE-1986),   National Council of Educational research and training published physics   textbooks for Classes XI and XII, prepared under the chair manship of   Professor t. V

. V. ramakrishnan, F. r.S., with the help of a team of learned co-authors.  the books were well received by the teachers and students alike. the books, in  fact, proved to be milestones and trend-setters. However , the development of  textbooks, particularly science books, is a dynamic process in view of the changing  perceptions, needs, feedback and the experiences of the students, educators and the society.  another version of the physics books, which was the result of the  revised syllabus based on  National Curriculum Framework for School Education-2000  (NCFSE-2000), was brought out under the guidance of Professor Suresh Chandra, which continued up to now.  recently the NCE rt brought out the National   Curriculum Framework- 2005 (NCF-2005), and the syllabus was accordingly revised  during a curriculum renewal process at school level. the higher secondary stage  syllabus (NCE rt, 2005) has been developed accordingly. the Class XI textbook  contains fifteen chapters in two parts

. the higher secondary stage  syllabus (NCE rt, 2005) has been developed accordingly. the Class XI textbook  contains fifteen chapters in two parts. Part I contains first eight chapters while Part II contains next seven chapters.  this book is the result of the renewed ef forts  of the present textbook Development team with the hope that the students will  appreciate the beauty and logic of physics. the students may or may not continue  to study physics beyond the higher secondary stage,  but we feel that they will find  the thought process of physics useful in any other branch they may like to pursue, be it finance, administration, social sciences, environment, engineering, technology, biology or medicine. For those who pursue physics beyond this stage, the matter developed in these books will certainly provide a sound base. Physics is basic to the understanding of almost all the branches of science  and technology

. Physics is basic to the understanding of almost all the branches of science  and technology. It is interesting to note that the ideas and concepts of physics are increasingly being used in other branches such as economics and commerce, and behavioural sciences too. We are conscious of the fact that some of the underlying simple basic physics principles are often conceptually quite intricate. In this book, we have tried to bring in a conceptual coherence.  the pedagogy and the use of  easily understandable language  are at the core of our effort without sacrificing the  rigour of the subject. the nature of the subject of physics is such that a certain  minimum use of mathematics is a must. We have tried to develop the mathematical   formulations in a logical fashion, as far as possible. Students and teachers of physics must realise that physics is a branch which  needs to be understood, not necessarily memorised

. Students and teachers of physics must realise that physics is a branch which  needs to be understood, not necessarily memorised. as one goes from secondary  to higher secondary stage and beyond, physics involves mainly four components,   (a) large amount of  mathematical base, (b) technical words and terms, whose  normal English meanings could be quite different, (c) new intricate concepts, and (d) experimental foundation. Physics needs mathematics because we wish to develop objective description of the world around us and express our observations in terms of measurable quantities. Physics discovers new properties of particles and wants to create a name for each one.  the words are picked up nor mally from  common English or Latin or Greek, but gives entirely different meanings to these words. It would be illuminating to look up words like energy, force, power, charge, spin, and several others, in any standard English dictionary, and compare their  Prelims

. It would be illuminating to look up words like energy, force, power, charge, spin, and several others, in any standard English dictionary, and compare their  Prelims.indd   7 1/2/2023   10:32:34 2024-25  meanings with their physics meanings. Physics develops intricate and often  weird-looking concepts to explain the behaviour of particles. Finally, it must be remembered that entire physics is based on observations and experiments, without which a theory does not get acceptance into the domain of physics. This book has some features which, we earnestly hope, will enhance its  usefulness for the students. Each chapter is provided with a Summary at its end for a quick overview of the contents of the chapter. This is followed by Points to Ponder which points out the likely misconceptions arising in the minds of students, hidden implications of certain statements/principles given in the chapter and cautions needed in applying the knowledge gained from the chapter

. They also raise some thought-provoking questions which would make a student think about life beyond physics. Students will find it interesting to think and apply their mind on these points. Further, a large number of solved examples are included in the text in order to clarify the concepts and/or to illustrate the application of these concepts in everyday real-life situations. Occasionally, historical perspective has been included to share the excitement of sequential development of the subject of physics. Some Boxed items are introduced in many chapters either for this purpose or to highlight some special features of the contents requiring additional attention of the learners. Finally, a Subject Index has been added at the end of the book for ease in locating keywords in the book

. Finally, a Subject Index has been added at the end of the book for ease in locating keywords in the book. The special nature of physics demands, apart from conceptual understanding,  the knowledge of certain conventions, basic mathematical tools, numerical values of important physical constants, and systems of measurement units covering a vast range from microscopic to galactic levels. In order to equip the students, we have included the necessary tools and database in the form of Appendices A-1 to A-9 at the end of the book. There are also some other appendices at the end of some chapters giving additional information or applications of matter discussed in that chapter. Special attention has been paid for providing illustrative figures. To increase the  clarity, the figures are drawn in two colours. A large number of Exercises are given at the end of each chapter. Some of these are from real-life situations. Students are urged to solve these and in doing so, they may find them very educative

. A large number of Exercises are given at the end of each chapter. Some of these are from real-life situations. Students are urged to solve these and in doing so, they may find them very educative. Moreover, some Additional Exercises are given which are more challenging. Answers and  hints to solve some of these are also included. In the entire book, SI units have been used. A comprehensive account of ‘units and measurement’ is given in Chapter 2 as a part of prescribed syllabus/curriculum as well as a help in their pursuit of physics. A box-item in this chapter brings out the difficulty in measuring as simple a thing as the length of a long curved line. Tables of SI base units and other related units are given here merely to indicate the presently accepted definitions and to indicate the high degree of accuracy with which measurements are possible today. The numbers given here are not to be memorised or asked in examinations

. The numbers given here are not to be memorised or asked in examinations. There is a perception among students, teachers, as well as the general public  that there is a steep gradient between secondary and higher secondary stages. But a little thought shows that it is bound to be there in the present scenario of education. Education up to secondary stage is general education where a student has to learn several subjects – sciences, social sciences, mathematics, languages, at an elementary level. Education at the higher secondary stage and beyond, borders on acquiring professional competence, in some chosen fields of endeavour. You   may like to compare this with the following situation. Children play cricket or badminton in lanes and small spaces outside (or inside) their homes. But then  viii Prelims.indd   8 1/4/2023   15:07:42 2024-25  some of them want to make it to the school team, then district team, then State  team and then the National team. At every stage, there is bound to be a steep gradient

. At every stage, there is bound to be a steep gradient. Hard work would have to be put in whether students want to pursue their education in the area of sciences, humanities, languages, music, fine arts, commerce, finance, architecture, or if they want to become sportspersons or fashion designers. Completing this book has only been possible because of the spontaneous  and continuous support of many people. The Textbook Development Team is thankful to Dr. V. H. Raybagkar for allowing us to use his box item in Chapter 4 and to Dr. F. I. Surve for allowing us to use two of his box items in Chapter 15. We express also our gratitude to the Director, NCERT, for entrusting us with the task of preparing this textbook as a part of national effort for improving science education. The Head, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, was always willing to help us in our endeavour in every possible way

. The Head, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, was always willing to help us in our endeavour in every possible way.  The previous text got excellent academic inputs from teachers, students and  experts who sincerely suggested improvement during the past few years. We are thankful to all those who conveyed these inputs to NCERT. We are also thankful to the members of the Review Workshop and Editing Workshop organised to discuss and refine the first draft. We thank the Chairmen and their teams of authors for the text written by them in 1988, which provided the base and reference for developing the 2002 version as well as the present version of the textbook. Occasionally, substantial portions from the earlier versions, particularly those appreciated by students/teachers, have been adopted/adapted and retained in the present book for the benefit of coming generation of learners.  We welcome suggestions and comments from our valued users, especially  students and teachers

.  We welcome suggestions and comments from our valued users, especially  students and teachers. We wish our young readers a happy journey to the exciting realm of physics.  A. W. J oshi Chief Advisor Textbook Development Committeeix Prelims.indd   9 1/4/2023   15:07:42 2024-25  acknowledgements the National Council of Educational research and training acknowledges  the valuable contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the  development of  Physics textbook for Class XI. the Council also  acknowledges  the valuable contribution of the following academics for reviewing and refining the manuscripts of this book: Deepak Kumar, Professor, School of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Pankaj Sharan, Professor,  Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi;  ajoy Ghatak, Emeritus Professor , Indian  Institute of technology, N ew Delhi; V. Sundara raja,  Professor, Sri Venkateswara  University, tirupati, andhra Pradesh; C.S

. Sundara raja,  Professor, Sri Venkateswara  University, tirupati, andhra Pradesh; C.S. adgaonkar, Reader ( Retd), Institute  of Science, Nagpur, Maharashtra; D. a. Desai, Lecturer ( Retd), ruparel College,  Mumbai, Maharashtra; F.I. Surve,  Lecturer, Nowrosjee Wadia College, Pune,  Maharashtra; atul Mody, Lecturer  (SG), VES College of arts, Science and  Co mmerce, Chembur, Mumbai, Maharashtra; a.K.  Das, PGT, St. Xavier’s Senior  Secondary School, Delhi; Suresh Kumar, PGT, Delhi Public School, Dwarka,   New Delhi; Yashu Kumar, PGT, Kulachi Hansraj Model School, ashok Vihar ,  Delhi; K.S. Upadhyay, PGT, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Muzaffar Nagar (U.P.);   I.K. Gogia, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Gole Market, New Delhi; Vijay Sharma, PGT, Vasant Valley School, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi;  r.S. Dass, Vice Principal  (Retd ), Balwant ray Mehta Vidya Bhawan, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi and   Parthasarthi Panigrahi, PGT, D.V. CLW Girls School, Chittranjan, West Bengal

.S. Dass, Vice Principal  (Retd ), Balwant ray Mehta Vidya Bhawan, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi and   Parthasarthi Panigrahi, PGT, D.V. CLW Girls School, Chittranjan, West Bengal.  the Council also gratefully acknowledges the valuable contribution of   the following academics for the editing and finalisation of this book:  a.S. Mahajan,   Professor ( Retd), Indian Institute of technology, Mumbai, Maharashtra;    D.a. Desai, Lecturer (Retd ), ruparel College, Mumbai, Maharashtra;   V .H. raybagkar, Reader , Nowrosjee Wadia College, Pune, Maharashtra and   atul Mody, Lecturer (SG), VES College of arts, Science and Commerce, Chembur,   Mumbai, Maharashtra.  the Council also  acknowledges the valuable contributions of the following  academics for reviewing and refining the text in 2017: a.K. Srivastava, DESM,  NCErt, New Delhi; arnab Sen, NE rIE, Shillong; L.S. Chauhan, rIE, Bhopal;  O.N. awasthi (Retd.), rIE, Bhopal; rachna Garg, DESM, NCE rt, New Delhi;  raman Namboodiri, rIE, Mysuru; r.r

.S. Chauhan, rIE, Bhopal;  O.N. awasthi (Retd.), rIE, Bhopal; rachna Garg, DESM, NCE rt, New Delhi;  raman Namboodiri, rIE, Mysuru; r.r. Koireng, DCS, NCE rt, New Delhi;  Shashi Prabha, DESM, NCE rt, New Delhi; and S.V. Sharma, rIE, ajmer.  Special thanks are due to M. Chandra, Professor and  Head,  DESM, NCE rt  for her support.  the C ouncil also acknowledges the efforts of Deepak Kapoor, Incharge,   Computer Station, Inder Kumar, DTP Operator; Saswati Banerjee,   Copy Editor; abhimanu Mohanty and anuradha, Proof Readers  in shaping   this book.  the contributions of the Publication Department in bringing out this book  are also duly acknowledged. Prelims.indd   10 1/2/2023   10:32:34 2024-25  textbook  develo Pment committee chair Person , advisory  grouP For textbooks  in science  and mathematics J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman,  advisory Committee, Inter University  Centre for astronomy and astrophysics (IUCC a), Ganeshbhind, Pune University, Pune chieF advisor a.W

.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman,  advisory Committee, Inter University  Centre for astronomy and astrophysics (IUCC a), Ganeshbhind, Pune University, Pune chieF advisor a.W. Joshi, Professor, Honorary Visiting Scientist, NC ra, Pune (Formerly at  Department of Physics, University of Pune) members anuradha Mathur, PGT , Modern School, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi Chitra Goel, PGT, rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, tyagraj Nagar, Lodhi road,   New Delhi Gagan Gupta, Reader,  DESM, NCE rt, New Delhi H.C. Pradhan, Professor,  Homi Bhabha Centre of Science Education, tata Institute   of Fundamental research, V.N. Purav Mar g, Mankhurd, Mumbai N. Panchapakesan, Professor ( retd.), Department of Physics and astrophysics,  University of  Delhi, DelhiP.K. Srivastava,  Professor ( retd.), Director, CSEC,  University of Delhi, Delhi P .K. Mohanty, PGT, Sainik School, Bhubaneswar P.C. agarwal, Reader,  regional Institute of Education, NCE rt, Sachivalaya Marg,  Bhubaneswar r. Joshi, Lecturer  (S.G

.K. Mohanty, PGT, Sainik School, Bhubaneswar P.C. agarwal, Reader,  regional Institute of Education, NCE rt, Sachivalaya Marg,  Bhubaneswar r. Joshi, Lecturer  (S.G.), DESM, NCE rt, New Delhi S. rai Choudhary, Professor , Department of Physics and astrophysics, University of  Delhi,  DelhiS.K. Dash, Reader , DESM, NCE rt, New Delhi Sher Singh, PGT, Lodhi road, New Delhi S.N. Prabhakara, PGT,  DM School,  regional Institute of Education, NCE rt, Mysore thiyam Jekendra Singh, Professor , Department of Physics, University of Manipur,  Imphal V.P. Srivastava, Reader, DESM, NCE rt, New Delhi member -coordinator B.K. Sharma, Professor,  DESM, NCE rt, New Delhi Prelims.indd   11 1/2/2023   10:32:35 2024-25  cover design   (Adapted from the website of the Nobel Foundation   http://www.nobelprize.org) The strong nuclear force binds protons and  neutrons in a nucleus and is the strongest of nature’s four fundamental forces. A mystery surrounding the strong nuclear force has been solved

.org) The strong nuclear force binds protons and  neutrons in a nucleus and is the strongest of nature’s four fundamental forces. A mystery surrounding the strong nuclear force has been solved. The three quarks within the proton can sometimes appear to be free, although no free quarks have ever been observed. The quarks have a quantum mechanical property called ‘colour’ and interact with each other through   the exchange of particles called ‘gluons’   — nature glue. back cover (Adapted from the website of the ISRO  http://www.isro.gov.in) CARTOSAT-1 is a state-of-the-art Remote Sensing Satellite, being eleventh one in the Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) Satellite Series, built by ISRO. CARTOSAT-1, having mass of   156 kg at lift off, has been launched into a   618 km high polar Sun Synchronous Orbit (SSO) by ISRO’s Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle,   PSLV-C6. It is mainly intended for cartographic applications. Prelims

. It is mainly intended for cartographic applications. Prelims.indd   12 1/2/2023   10:32:35 2024-25  a note For the teachers to make the curriculum learner-centred, students should be made to participate and interact  in the lear ning process directly. Once a week or one out of every six classes would be a good  periodicity for such seminars and mutual interaction. Some suggestions for making the discussion  participatory are given below, with reference to some specific topics in this book. Students may be divided into groups of five to six. the membership of these groups may be  rotated during the year , if felt necessary. the topic for discussion can be presented on the board or on slips of paper . Students should  be asked to write their reactions or answers to questions, whichever is asked, on the given sheets.  they  should then discuss in their groups and add modifications or comments in those sheets. these   should be discussed either in the same or in a different class

.  they  should then discuss in their groups and add modifications or comments in those sheets. these   should be discussed either in the same or in a different class. the sheets may also be evaluated. We suggest  here three possible topics from the book. the first two  topics suggested are, in  fact, very general and refer to the development of science over the past four centuries or more. Students and teachers may think of more such topics for each seminar. 1.  Ideas that changed civilisation Suppose human beings are becoming extinct. a message has to be left for future generations  or alien visitors. Eminent physicist r P Feynmann wanted the following message left for future  beings, if any. “Matter is made up of atoms” a lady student and teacher of literature, wanted the following message left: “Water existed, so human beings could happen”. another person thought it should be: “Idea of wheel for motion” Write down what message each one of you would like to leave for futur e generations

. another person thought it should be: “Idea of wheel for motion” Write down what message each one of you would like to leave for futur e generations. then  discuss it in your group and add or modify, if you want to change your mind. Give it to your  teacher and join in any discussion that follows. 2. Reductionism Kinetic theory of Gases relates the Big to the Small, the Macro to the Micr o. a gas as a system  is related to its components,  the molecules. this way of describing a system as a result of the  properties  of its components is usually called Reductionism. It explains the behaviour of the  group by the simpler and predictable behaviour of individuals. Macroscopic observations and  microscopic properties have a mutual interdependence in this approach. Is this method useful? this way of  understanding has its limitations outside physics and chemistry, may be even in  these subjects

. Is this method useful? this way of  understanding has its limitations outside physics and chemistry, may be even in  these subjects. a painting cannot be discussed as a collection of the pr operties of chemicals used  in making the canvas and the painting. What emerges is more than the sum of its components. Question: Can you think of other areas where such an approach is used?           Describe briefly a system which is fully describable in terms of its components.  Describe  one which is not. Discuss with other members of the group and write your views. Give it to your teacher and join in any discussion that may follow. 3.  Molecular approach to heat Describe what you think will happen in the following case. an enclosure is separated by a porous  wall into two parts. One is filled with nitr ogen gas (N2) and the other with CO2. Gases will diffuse  from one side to the other. Question 1:  Will both gases diffuse to the same extent? If not, which will diffuse more. Give reasons

. Gases will diffuse  from one side to the other. Question 1:  Will both gases diffuse to the same extent? If not, which will diffuse more. Give reasons. Question 2: Will the pressure and temperature be unchanged? If not, what will be the changes  in both. Give reasons.  Write down your answers. Discuss with the group and modify them or add comments.  Give to the teacher and join in the discussion.  Students and teachers will find that such seminars and discussions lead to tremendous  understanding, not only of physics, but also of science and social sciences. they also bring in  some maturity among students. Prelims.indd   13 1/2/2023   10:32:35 2024-25  contents  oF Physics  Part i CHAPTER  1 Units and measUrements  1 CHAPTER  2 motion in a straight  line 13 CHAPTER  3 motion in a Plane 37 CHAPTER  4 laws oF motion 49 CHAPTER  5 work, energy  and Power 71 CHAPTER  6 system  oF Particles  and rotational  motion 92 CHAPTER  7 gravitation  127 APPENDICES 144 ANSWERS 160 Prelims

.indd   14 1/2/2023   10:32:35 2024-25  contents Foreword  iii rationalisation  oF contens  in the textbooks  v PreFace vii  a note For the teachers  xiii C H A P T E R    8 mechanical  ProPerties  oF solids 8.1 Introduction  167 8.2 Stress and strain  168 8.3 Hooke’s law  169 8.4 Stress-strain curve  169 8.5 Elastic moduli  170 8.6 a pplications of elastic behaviour of materials  174 C H A P T E R    9 mechanical  ProPerties  oF FlUids 9.1 Introduction  180 9.2 Pressure  180 9.3 Streamline flow  186 9.4 Bernoulli’s principle  187 9.5 Viscosity  190 9.6 Surface tension  192 C H A P T E R    10 thermal  ProPerties  oF matter 10.1  Introduction  202 10.2  temperature and heat  202 10.3  Measurement of temperature  203 10.4  Ideal-gas equation and absolute temperature  203 10.5  thermal expansion  204 10.6  Specific heat capacity  208 10.7  Calorimetry  209 10.8  Change of state  210 10.9  Heat transfer  214 10.10  Newton’s law of cooling  219 C H A P T E R    11 thermodynamics 11.1  Introduction  226 11

.7  Calorimetry  209 10.8  Change of state  210 10.9  Heat transfer  214 10.10  Newton’s law of cooling  219 C H A P T E R    11 thermodynamics 11.1  Introduction  226 11.2  thermal equilibrium  227 11.3  Zeroth law of thermodynamics  228 11.4  Heat, internal energy and work  229 11.5  First law of thermodynamics  230 11.6  Specific heat capacity  231 Prelims.indd   15 1/2/2023   10:32:35 2024-25  11.7  Thermodynamic state variables and equation of state  232 11.8  Thermodynamic processes  233 11.9  Second law of thermodynamics  236 11.10  Reversible and irreversible processes  236 11.11  Carnot engine  237 C h a p t e r    12 Kinetic  theory 12.1  Introduction  244 12.2  Molecular nature of matter  244 12.3  Behaviour of gases  246 12.4  Kinetic theory of an ideal gas  248 12.5  Law of equipartition of energy  252 12.6  Specific heat capacity  253 12.7  Mean free path  254 C h a p t e r    13 oscillations 13.1 Introduction  259 13.2 Periodic and oscilatory motions  260 13.3 Simple harmonic motion  262 13

.6  Specific heat capacity  253 12.7  Mean free path  254 C h a p t e r    13 oscillations 13.1 Introduction  259 13.2 Periodic and oscilatory motions  260 13.3 Simple harmonic motion  262 13.4 Simple harmonic motion and uniform circular motion  264 13.5 Velocity and acceleration in simple harmonic motion  266 13.6 Force law for simple harmonic motion  267 13.7 Energy in simple harmonic motion  268 13.8 The Simple Pendulum  270 C h a p t e r    14W aves 14.1  Introduction  278 14.2  Transverse and longitudinal waves  280 14.3  Displacement relation in a progressive wave  281 14.4  The speed of a travelling wave  284 14.5  The principle of superposition of waves  287 14.6  Reflection of waves  288 14.7  Beats  293 anSwERS 300   BIBLIogRaPhy 307 InDEx  309xvi Prelims.indd   16 1/4/2023   15:46:16 2024-25

